Is there any purpose in the repetition of the same types of charactersthroughout your writing? No, only that I have led all of my life has been lived in alittle Mississippi town, and there's not much variety there. Aawriter writes from his experience, his background, in the terms ofhis imagination and his observation. That would be the explanation, I think. Sir, in line with that, some of your novels pick up characters where you left them off in other novelsthat you had written a good number of years before. For example, most of theincidents involving the Snopes, as I understand it, were written from 1929 onand yet you've come out with a book this year about the Snopes. Do you find itdifficult to, over a period of years, pick up those characters and carry theirpersonalities through along the same vein? No, no, those characters to me areare quite real and quiteconstant. They are in mymy mind all the time. I don't have any trouble at allgoing back to pick up one. I forget what they did, butbutthe character I don't forget, and when the book is finished, thatcharacter is not done, he's still going on at some new devilment that sooner orlater I will find out about and write about.  It's been said that you write about the secret of the human heart. Isthere one major truth of the human heart? Well, that's a question almost metaphysical. I would say if there is onetruth of the human heart, it would be to believe in itself, believe initsits capacity to aspire, to be better than it is, it might be. Thatit does exist in all people. Sir, it has been said that at certain points in the evolution of society,an author is within the society describing his immediate surroundings and whathe sees at that time, but as that society degrades and goes down, the author isthrown out and looks as an outsider on his society such that you might see whenyou look at the [South] ? What do you feel is your position insociety today? Are you looking from within or are you out of the society lookingat it objectively, the South in particular? I think that I'm still a part of society. I think that as I grow older Iknow more, and I see more, understand more of what I see, but I am as muchinvolved in society as I was when I was a young man. I justjust knowmore of what I see now, because I'm older.   in light of the question out here and your answer aboutwriting about Jefferson because that's what you know, I've always beeninterested in why you switched [then] to France with AFable, which is another treatment of the human heart? Why did you feelthat a European setting would be best for that theme? The Fable was the only book I ever wrote on anidea, and the idea was, who might that man be under the splendid cenotaph withthe eternal fire burning over him?That if he had been Christ returned again andcrucified again for the second time, then maybe we would have only one morechance. That was the only book I ever wrote from an idea, and that idea hadtosince the idea was, who might be under that cenotaph, it had to takeplace in France. Sir.Sir, on the inside of the cover of A Fable, I readthe comment that this work might possibly become a classic in the lifetime ofthe author. I never finished the book, and so I don't have an opinion of it tocomment. Do you care to comment? I don't think it's a very good book becauseit'sas I say, that's the only book I ever tried to write on ideas,and I'm not an idea man. I'm not a cerebral man. I writefromfromfrom here, and so I don't consider that a very good book myself.It was the best I could do with the idea, and I had to write it because the ideaworried me. I was wondering whether Charles Bon in Absalom,Absalom! ever had [concluded] who his father was, Sutpen I think he knew. I don't know whether hehis mother probablytold him. I think he knew.Was it a conscious knowledge, would you say, or an unconsciousknowledge? Probably itit was a conscious knowledge, in the sense that hismother had told him who his father was. It may be that he didn't believe it ordidn't know or didn't care. I thinkI don't believe that he felt anyaffinity with Sutpen, as father and son, but probably his mother had told himandthat she had been deserted and if anything, if he did believe it,he hated Sutpen, of course. Sir, do you thinkaccording to Nathaniel Hawthorne, thegreatest sin was the violation of the human heart. Would you say that you thinkalong those lines as far as what the greatest sin could be or the greatest[crime a character could commit]? Would you agree with thatstatement? Yes, yes, I agree with that. She is the same person, actually. Yes, she is the same personal actually. These people I figure belong tome, and I have the right to move them about in time when I need them.Mr. Faulkner.  throughout your work there seems to be a theme that there'sa curse upon the South. I was wondering if you could explain what this curse isand if there's any chance of the South of escaping it. Thethe curse is slavery, which is aan intolerablecondition. No man shall be enslaved, and the South has got toworkwork that curse out, and it will, if it's let alone.Itit can't be compelled to do it. Itit must do it of itsown will andand desire, which I believe it will do, if it's letalone.Sir, along that line, how will it do it, and what will [it do] to adjust its relationship with the Negro? Will it take the Negro intosociety or what will ? No, it willit will never take the Negro into society. It willgive the Negro the right for equality, which to me is something different. Itwillwill teach the Negro the responsibility of equality, ofthe Negro's own people will teach him that. Then hewillwill receive equality. HeI think that the Negrodoesn't want to mix with the white man any more than the white man wants to mixwith the Negro, but I do think that the Negro wants to be equal with the whiteman and have the right to, that onceonce he has the same right toenter the white man's house that another white man does, hewon't want to, that his grief is that he knows that he has notthat right. No matter how clean he is or how intelligent, he has not that right,to enter the white man's restaurant, the white man's hotel. Once he has thatright, he won't want to. He'll prefer his own, I believe. Sir, so many of your books have certain characters of mixed blood. Do youconsider miscegenation absolutean absolute wrong or is it just a mistake with thecurrent social ? It'sno, not wrong. It's a mistake only in the current socialscheme. There'sthere's no law that is going to preventRomeo and Juliet no matter what color they are. There's no wrong in it. It'ssimply a mistake and an error as conditions are now, and an individual suffersbecause of it. That's the tragedy of it.  In Absalom, Absalom!reaction to Sutpen's marriage because of their concern for theirbecause there's? I'm sorry. I couldn't hear that too well.Was the reaction of the people to Sutpen's second marriage, when they hadno oneshowed up at the [wedding] was that reaction caused bypeople'sthe people's dislike of his [life] or hissocial errors or because of their not being told whywhere he got hismoney ? Oh, he had violated the local mores. Theythey feared him, andthey hated him, because of his ruthlessness. He made no pretence to be anythingelse except what he was, and so he violated the local mores, andtheythey ostracized him. Not in revenge at all, but simply becausethey wanted no part of Sutpen.  you say that you feel that there is hope for the South, yetthe Snopeses have taken over Frenchmen's Bend, Flem is president of the bank inJefferson. Are those the men that are going to lead the South out of thedarkness in ? They are the men that can cope with the new industrialage, but there will be something left, as thiswe mentioned a whileago, ofof the old cavalier spirit that will appear, that does appear.Iby cavalier spirit, I mean people who believe inin simplehonor for thefor the sake of honor, and honesty for the sake ofhonesty.Do you think [those] people will band together, or howdo you think they will accomplish this feat?[Don't you feel that]that there is acurse and that it should be removed? How do you feel [that they will eventually overcome]? Theythey won't band together. I doubt if people accomplishvery much by banding together. People accomplish things by individualprotest. Is Sutpen meant to be a completely depraved character, something likeClaggart in Billy Budd or Iago in Othello, or is he meant to be pitied? To me, he is to be pitied. He was notdepraved.Hewas amoral. He was ruthless, completely self-centered. To me he isto be pitied, as anyone who ignores man is to be pitied, who does not believethat he belongs as a member ofof a human family, of the human family,is to be pitied. Sutpen didn't believe that. He was Sutpen. He was going to takewhat he wanted because he was big enough and strong enough, and I think thatpeople like that are destroyed sooner or later, because one has got to belong tothe human family, and to take a responsible part in the human family. [If you were] to explain mechanization in the Southafter the Civil War as a destructive force, part of the degeneration, do youthink this is inherent of mechanization in a society when it shifts from anagrarian society or do you think this is because, as a person in the South, thatit is this way in the South? Well, the South is a part of the United States, and I thinkthat we arethe whole world is going through atragic time now, not because of mechanization, but because we became slavesto the machines[at]which we invented for man'sgood. Instead of they being our slaves, we are their slaves.And we will havetobut man is tougher even than the machine, that hewillwill endure and will outlast the age in which thatmachine dominates. I'm sure we're all very grateful to you for comingdown and answering our questions this morning. Thank you, sir.   Pap got up a good hour before daylight and caught themule and rid down to Killegrews' to borrow the froe and maul. He ought tobeen back with it in forty minutes. But the sun had rose and I had donemilked and fed and was eating my breakfast when he got back, with the mulenot only in a lather but right on the edge of the thumps too."Fox hunting,"he said. "Fox hunting. A seventy-year-old man, with both feet and one knee,too, already in the grave, squatting all night on a hill and calling himselflistening to a fox race that he couldn't even hear unless they had comeright up onto the same log he was setting on and bayed into his ear trumpet.Give me my breakfast," he told maw. "Whitfield is standing there right thisminute, straddle of that board tree with his watch in his hand."And he was.We rid on past the church, and there was not only Solon Quick's school-bustruck but Reverend Whitfield's old mare too. We tied the mule to a saplingand hung our dinner bucket on a limb, and with pap toting Killegrew's froeand maul and the wedges and me toting our ax, we went on to the board treewhere Solon and Homer Bookwright, with their froes and mauls and axes andwedges, was setting on two upended cuts, and Whitfield was standing jestlike pap said, in his boiled shirt and his black hat and pants and necktie,holding his watch in his hand. It was gold and in the morning sunlight itlooked as big as a full-growed squash."You're late," he said. So pap told them again about how OldMan Killegrew had been off fox hunting all night, and nobody at home to lendhim the froe but Mrs. Killegrew and the cook. And naturally, the cook wasn'tgoing to lend none of Killegrew's tools out, and Mrs. Killegrew was worserdeaf than even Killegrew. If you was to run in and tell her the house wasafire, she would jest keep on rocking and say she thought so, too, unlessshe began to holler back to the cook to turn the dogs loose before you couldeven open your mouth."You could have gone yesterday and borrowed the froe,"Whitfield said. "You have known for a month now that you had promised thisone day out of a whole summer toward putting a roof on the house of God.""We ain't but two hours late," pap said. "I reckon the Lord will forgive it.He ain't interested in time, nohow. He's interested in salvation."Whitfieldnever even waited for pap to finish. It looked to me like he even gottaller, thundering down at pap like a cloudburst. "He ain't interested inneither! Why should He be, when He owns them both? And why should He turnaround for the poor, mizzling souls of men that can't even borrow tools intime to replace the shingles on His church, I don't know either. Maybe it'sjust because He made them. Maybe He just said to Himself: 'I made them; Idon't know why. But since I did, I Godfrey, I'll roll my sleeves up and dragthem into glory whether they will or no!'" But that wasn't here nor there neither now, and I reckonhe knowed it, jest like he knowed there wasn't going to be nothing atallhere as long as he stayed. So he put the watch back into his pocket andmotioned Solon and Homer up, and we all taken off our hats except him whilehe stood there with his face raised into the sun and his eyes shut and hiseyebrows looking big like iron-gray caterpillars lying along the edge of acliff. "Lord," he said, "make them good straight shingles to lay smooth, andlet them split out easy; they're for You," and opened his eyes and looked atus again, mostly at pap, and went and untied his mare and clumb up slow andstiff, like old men do, and rid away. Pap put down the froe and maul and laid the three wedgesin a neat row on the ground and taken up the ax. "Well, men," he said,"let's get started. We're already late." "Me and Homer ain't," Solon said."We was here." This time him and Homer didn't set on the cuts. They squattedon their heels. Then I seen that Homer was whittling on a stick. I hadn'tnoticed it before. "I make it two hours and a little over," Solon said."More or less." Pap was still about half stooped over, holding the ax. "It'snigher one," he said. "But call it two for the sake of the argument. Whatabout it?""What argument?" Homer said. "All right," pap said. "Two hoursthen. What about it?""Which is three man-hour units a hour, multiplied bytwo hours," Solon said. "Or a total of six work units." When the WPA firstcome to Yoknapatawpha County and started to giving out jobs and grub andmattresses, Solon went in to Jefferson to get on it. He would drive hisschool-bus truck the twenty-two miles in to town every morning and come backthat night. He done that for almost a week before he found out he would notonly have to sign his farm off into somebody else's name, he couldn't evenown and run the school bus that he had built himself. So he come back thatnight and never went back no more, and since then hadn't nobody bettermention WP and A to him unless they aimed to fight, too, though every now andthen he would turn up with something all figured down into work units likehe done now. "Six units short." "Four of which you and Homer could have already workedout while you was setting here waiting on me," pap said."Except that wedidn't," Solon said. "We promised Whitfield two units of twelve three-unithours toward getting some new shingles on the church roof. We been here eversince sunup, waiting for the third unit to show up, so we could start. Youdon't seem to kept up with these modern ideas about work that's beenflooding and uplifting the country in the last few years.""What modrenideas?" pap said. "I didn't know there was but one idea about workuntil itis done, it ain't done, and when it is done, it is."Homer made anotherlong, steady whittle on the stick. His knife was sharp as a razor.Solontaken out his snuffbox and filled the top and tilted the snuff into his lipand offered the box to Homer, and Homer shaken his head, and Solon put thetop back on the box and put the box back into his pocket."So," pap said,"jest because I had to wait two hours for a old seventy-year man to get backfrom fox hunting that never had no more business setting out in the woodsall night than he would 'a' had setting all night in a highway juke joint,we all three have got to come back here tomorrow to finish them two hoursthat vou and Homer""I ain't," Solon said. "I don't know about Homer. Ipromised Whitfield one day. I was here at sunup to start it. When the sungoes down, I will consider I have done finished it." "I see," pap said. "I see. It's me that's got to comeback. By myself. I got to break into a full morning to make up them twohours that you and Homer spent resting. I got to spend two hours of the nextday making up for the two hours of the day before that you and Homer nevereven worked.""It's going to more than jest break into a morning," Solonsaid. "It's going to wreck it. There's six units left over. Six one-man-hourunits. Maybe you can work twice as fast as me and Homer put together andfinish them in four hours, but I don't believe you can work three times asfast and finish in two."  "Maybe there's something else besides cash you might beable to trade with," Solon said. "You might use that dog." That was when papactually stopped. I didn't know it myself then either, but I found out agood long time before Solon did. Pap set there with the maul up over hishead and the blade of the froe set against the block for the next lick,looking up at Solon. "The dog?" he said.It was a kind of mixed hound, witha little bird dog and some collie and maybe a considerable of almostanything else, but it would ease through the woods without no more noisethan a hant and pick up a squirrel's trail on the ground and bark jest once,unless it knowed you was where you could see it, and then tiptoe that trailout jest like a man and never make another sound until it treed, and onlythen when it knowed you hadn't kept in sight of it. It belonged to pap andVernon Tull together. Will Varner give it to Tull as a puppy, and pap raisedit for a half interest; me and him trained it and it slept in my bed with meuntil it got so big maw finally run it out of the house, and for the lastsix months Solon had been trying to buy it. Him and Tull had agreed on twodollars for Tull's half of it, but Solon and pap was still six dollars aparton ourn, because pap said it was worth ten dollars of anybody's money and ifTull wasn't going to collect his half of that, he was going to collectit for him. "So that's it," pap said. "Them things wasn't work unitsatall. They was dog units."  "Jest a suggestion," Solon said. "Jest afriendly offer to keep them runaway shingles from breaking up your privatebusiness for six hours tomorrow morning. You sell me your half of that trickovergrown fyce and I'll finish these shingles for you." "Naturally includingthem six extra units of one dollars," pap said."No, no," Solon said. "I'llpay you the same two dollars for your half of that dog that me and Tullagreed on for his half of it. You meet me here tomorrow morning with the dogand you can go on back home or wherever them urgent private affairs arelocated, and forget about that church roof."  "Your half of the dog for that half a day's work youstill owe on them shingles.""And the two dollars," pap said. "That you andTull agreed on. I sell you half the dog for two dollars, and you come backhere tomorrow and finish the shingles. You give me the two dollars now, andI'll meet you here in the morning with the dog, and you can show me thereceipt from Tull for his half then." "Me and Tull have already agreed,"Solon said."All right," pap said. "Then you can pay Tull his two dollarsand bring his receipt with you without no trouble.""Tull will be at thechurch tomorrow morning, pulling off them old shingles," Solon said."Allright," pap said. "Then it won't be no trouble at all for you to get areceipt from him. You can stop at the church when you pass. Tull ain't namedGrier. He won't need to be off somewhere tomorrow morning borrowing a crowbar."So Solontaken out his purse and paid pap the two dollars and they went back to work.And now it looked like they really was trying to finish that afternoon, notjest Solon, but even Homer, that didn't even seem to be concerned in it nohow,and pap, that had already swapped a half a dog to get rid of whatever workSolon claimed would be left over. I quit trying to stay up with them; I jeststacked shingles. Then Solon laid his froe and maul down. "Well, men," hesaid, "I don't know what you fellers think, but I consider this a day.""Allright," pap said. "You are the one to decide when to quit, since whateverelbow units you consider are going to be shy tomorrow will be yourn.""That's a fact," Solon said. "And since I am giving a day and a half to thechurch instead of jest a day, like I started out doing, I reckon I betterget on home and tend to a little of my own work." He picked up his froe andmaul and ax and went to his truck and stood waiting for Homer to come andget in."I'll be here in the morning with the dog," pap said.  "Sholy," Solon said. It sounded like he had forgotabout the dog, or that it wasn't no longer any importance. But he stoodthere again and looked hard and quiet at pap for about a second. "And a billof sale from Tull for his half of it. As you say, it won't be no troublea-tall to get that from him." Him and Homer got into the truck and hestarted the engine. You couldn't say jest what it was. It was almost likeSolon was hurrying himself, so pap wouldn't have to make any excuse orpretense toward doing or not doing anything. "I have always understood thefact that lightning don't have to hit twice is one of the reasons why theynamed it lightning. So getting lightning-struck is a mistake that mighthappen to any man. The mistake I seem to made is, I never realized in timethat what I was looking at was a cloud. I'll see you in the morning.""Withthe dog," pap said."Certainly," Solon said, again like it had slipped hismind completely. "With the dog." Then him and Homer drove off. Then pap got up."What?" Isaid. "What? You swapped him your half of Tull's dog for that half a day'swork tomorrow. Now what?""Yes," pap said. "Only before that I had alreadyswapped Tull a half a day's work pulling off them old shingles tomorrow, forTull's half of that dog. Only we ain't got to wait until tomorrow. We'regoing to pull them shingles off tonight, and without no more racket about itthan is necessary. I don't aim to have nothing on my mind tomorrow butwatching Mr. Solon Work-Unit Quick trying to get a bill of sale for twodollars or ten dollars either on the other half of that dog. And we'll do ittonight. I don't want him jest to find out at sunup tomorrow that he is toolate. I want him to find out then that even when he had laid down to sleep hewas already too late."  So we went back home and I fed and milked while pap wentdown to Killegrews' to carry the froe and maul back and to borrow a crowbar.But of all places in the world and doing what under the sun with it, Old ManKillegrew had went and lost his crowbar out of a boat in forty feet ofwater. And pap said how he come within a inch of going to Solon's andborrowing his crowbar out of pure poetic justice,only Solon might havesmelled the rat jest from the idea of the crowbar. So pap went to Armstid'sand borrowed hisn and come back and we et supper and cleaned and filled thelantern while maw still tried to find out what we was up to that couldn'twait till morning. We left her still talking, even as far as the frontgate, and come on back to the church, walking this time, with the rope andcrowbar and a hammer for me, and the lantern still dark. Whitfield andSnopes was unloading a ladder from Snopes' wagon when we passed the churchon the way home before dark, so all we had to do was to set the ladder upagainst the church. Then pap clumb up onto the roof with the lantern andpulled off shingles until he could hang the lantern inside behind thedecking, where it could shine out through the cracks in the planks, but youcouldn't see it unless you was passing in the road, and by that time anybodywould 'a' already heard us. Then I clumb up with the rope, and pap reached itthrough the decking and around a rafter and back and tied the ends aroundour waists, and we started. And we went at it. We had them old shingles jestraining down, me using the claw hammer and pap using- the crowbar, workingthe bar under a whole patch of shingles at one time and then laying back onthe bar like in one more lick or ifor if the crowbar ever happened for one secondto get a solid holt, he would tilt the whole roof up at one time like ahinged box lid.That's exactly what he finally done, he laid back on the barand this time heit got a holt. It wasn't jest a patch of shingles, it was awhole section of decking, so that when he lunged back he snatched that wholesection of roof from around the lantern like you would shuck a corn nubbin.The lantern was hanging on a nail. He never even moved the nail, he jestpulled the board off of it, so that it looked like for a whole minute Iwatched the lantern, and the crowbar, too, setting there in the empty air ina little mess of floating shingles,with the empty nail still stickingthrough the bail of the lantern, before the whole thing started down intothe church. It hit the floor and bounced once. Then it hit the floor again,and this time the whole church jest blowed up into a pit of yellow jumpingfire, with me and pap hanging over the edge of it on two ropes. I don't know what become of the rope nor how we got outof it. I don't remember climbing down. Jest pap yelling behind me andpushing me halfway down the ladder and then throwing me the rest ofthe way by a handful of my overhalls, and then we was both on the ground,running for the water barrel. It set under the gutter spout at the side, andArmstid was there then; he had happened to go out to his lot about a hourback and seen the lantern on the church roof, and it stayed on his minduntil finally he come up to see what was going on, and got there jest intime to stand yelling back and forth with pap across the water barrel. And Ibelieve we still would have put it out. Pap turned and squatted against thebarrel and got a holt of it over his shoulder and stood up with that barrelthat was almost full and run around the corner and up the steps of thechurch and hooked his toe on the top step and come down with the barrelbusting on top of him and knocking him cold out as a wedge. So we had to drag him back first, and maw was therethen, and Mrs. Armstid about the same time, and me and Armstid run with thetwo fire buckets to the spring, and when we got back there was a plentythere, Whitfield, too, with more buckets, and we done what we could, but thespring was two hundred yards away and ten buckets emptied it and it takenfive minutes to fill again, so finally we all jest stood around wherepap had come to again with a big cut on his head and watched it go. It was aold church, long dried out, and full of old colored-picture charts thatWhitfield had accumulated for more than fifty years, that the lantern hadlit right in the middle of when it finally exploded. There was a specialnail where he would keep a old long nightshirt he would wear to baptize in.I used to watch it all the time during church and Sunday school, and meand the other boys would go past the church sometimes jest to peep in at it,because to a boy of ten it wasn't jest a cloth garment or even a iron armor;it was the old strong ArchArchangel Michael his self, that had fit and stroveand conquered sin for so long that it finally had the same contempt for thehuman beings that returned always to sin as hogs and dogs done that the oldstrong archangel himself must have had. So for a long time it never burned, even after everythingelse inside had. We could watch it, hanging there among the fire, not likeit had knowed in its time too much water to burn easy, but like it hadstrove and fit with the devil and all the hosts of hell too long to burn injest a fire like Res Grier started, trying to beat Solon Quick out of half adog. But at last it went, too, not in a hurry still, but jest all at once,kind of roaring right up on and out against the stars and the far darkspaces. And then there wasn't nothing but jest pap, drenched andgroggy-looking, on the ground, with the rest of us around him, and Whitfieldlike always in his boiled shirt and his black hat and pants, standing therewith his hat on, too, like he had strove too long to save what hadn't oughtto been created in the first place, from the damnation it didn't even wantto escape, to bother to need to take his hat off in any presence. He lookedaround at us from under it; we was all there now, all that belonged to thatchurch and used it to be born and marry and die fromus and the Armstids andTulls, and Bookwrights and Quick and Snopeses. "I was wrong," Whitfield said. "I told you we would meethere tomorrow to roof a church. We'll meet here in the morning to raiseone.""Of course we got to have a church," pap said. "We're going to haveone. And we're going to have it soon. But there's some of us done alreadygive a day or so this week, at the cost of our own work. Which is right andjust, and we're going to give more, and glad to. But I don't believe thatthe Lord" Whitfield let him finish. He never moved. He jest stood thereuntil pap finally run down out of his own accord and hushed and set there on theground mostly not looking at maw, before Whitfield opened his mouth."Notyou," Whitfield said. "Arsonist.""Arsonist?" pap said. "Yes," Whitfield said. "If there is any pursuit in whichyou can engage without carrying flood and fire and destruction and deathbehind you, do it. But not one hand shall you lay to this new house untilyou have proved to us that you are to be trusted again with the powers andcapacities of a man." He looked about at us again. "Tull and Snopes andArmstid have already promised for tomorrow. I understand that Quick hadanother half day he intended""I can give another day," Solon said."Ican give the rest of the week," Homer said."I ain't rushed neither," Snopessaid."That will be enough to start with, then," Whitfield said. "It's latenow. Let us all go home." He went first. He didn't look back once, at the churchor at us. He went to the old mare and clumb up slow and stiff and powerful,and was gone, and we went too, scattering. But I looked back at it. It wasjest a shell now, with a red and fading core, and I had hated it at timesand feared it at others, and I should have been glad. But there wassomething that even that fire hadn't even touched. Maybe that's all itwasjest indestructibility, endurabilitythat old man that could plan tobuild it back while its walls was still fire-fierce and then calmly turn hisback and go away because he knowed that the men that had never had nothing togive toward the new one but their work would be there at sunup tomorrow, andthe day after that, and the day after that, too, as long as it was needed,to give that work to build it back again. So it hadn't gone a-tall; itdidn't no more care for that little fire and flood than Whitfield's oldbaptizing gown had done. Then we was home. Maw had left so fast the lamp wasstill lit, and we could see pap now, still leaving a puddle where he stood,with a cut across the back of his head where the barrel had busted and theblood-streaked water soaking him to the waist. "Get them wet clothes off," maw said."I don't know as Iwill or not," pap said. "I been publicly notified that I ain't fitten toassociate with white folks, so I publicly notify them same white folks andMethodists, too, not to try to associate with me, or the devil can have thehindmost."But maw hadn't even listened. When she come back with a pan ofwater and a towel and the liniment bottle, pap was already in hisnightshirt."I don't want none of that neither," he said. "If my head wasn'tworth busting, it ain't worth patching." But she never paid no mind to thatneither. She washed his head off and dried it and put the bandage on andwent out again, and pap went and got into bed."Hand me my snuff; then youget out of here and stay out too," he said. But before I could do that maw come back. She had aglass of hot toddy, and she went to the bed and stood there with it, and papturned his head and looked at it."What's that?" he said.But maw neveranswered, and then he set up in bed and drawed a long, shuddering breathwecould hear itand after a minute he put out his hand for the toddy and setthere holding it and drawing his breath, and then he taken a sip of it."IGodfrey, if him and all of them put together think they can keep me fromworking on my own church like ary other man, he better be a good man to tryit." He taken another sip of the toddy. Then he taken a long one."Arsonist," he said. "Work units. Dog units. And now arsonist. I Godfrey,what a day!"[audience laughter and applause]  why do you choose to so often have your characters dressedin the vestments ofof the Christian myth, making at times Christ-like peoplelike Popeye or Joe Christmas or even Benjy, making them at other timesMadonna-like, such as the woman in Sanctuary, and atother times Judas-like, such as Lucas Burch in Light inAugust? I think a writer has to write out of his experience, his background.He also has a sort of lumber room, like the carpenter has a lumber room, a roomfull of scraps of boards, of this and that, and when he finds that he needssomething to tell the story he's trying to tell, he looks around in the lumberroom, and he finds a board that he can use.And since my past is aor mybackground is a Christian background, my education is the normal education,full of the Christian symbols, I use them as the carpenter uses the boards thatfit the job. I'm not trying to write about symbols at all. I'm writing aboutpeople, but I use these symbols simply because they're shortcuts to help me tellthe story I'm trying to tell. Sir, why do you sometimes satirize the South, and at other times veryvery strenuously satirize it?what is your generalfeeling of the South, and the deep South? It's my country, my native land, and I love it. I'm not trying tosatirize it. I'mI'm tryingthat is, I'm not expressing my own ideas in thestories I tell. I'm telling about people, and these people express ideaswhichwhich sometimes are mine, sometimes are not mine, but I myself am nottrying to satirize my country. I love it, and it has its faults, and I will tryto correct them, but I wouldn't try to correct them when I'm writing astory, because I'm tellingtalking about people then. When you draw your characters, they're probably composites, I imagine, ofpeople that you have met and known, but is there any special character orcharacters you draw on more than others from real life? No, it'sthe writer has three sources: observation, imagination, andexperience, and doubtI probablyeven he can't say at onetime just how much of each one he has used. He is too busy trying to make ahuman being that is alive, that will stand up and cast a shadow behind him,and he isthe writer is completely amoral, and he will take what he needs, wherehe finds it, because he is perfectly willing for anyone to take from him whatthey find in what he has done, that they can use. What would you say would be the relation in this rather charming storyyou just read to thewhat kind of lumber did you take from fact to build thisstory? What would you know [of] and see and hear, and how did youshape it to make it different from what you might have known in life? Well, these people that I know, they are my people, and I love them.They might well have done this. I just got to it before they did. Mr. Faulkner I want to ask you an entirely different question. I've brought somestudents who are creative writing students, and I'd like to ask [if youhave] some suggestions[different] suggestions  that you think a [beginning] writer should have, a youngwriter should have. The first thing to do, I think, is to read, to read and to read and toread. As I say, thethe writer has got to have a lumber room like thecarpenter, and the best lumber room he can have is thethe good books, toread and to read and to read. Thethe next thing is to watch people, to tryto understand why people do what they do, whether the motives are goodmotives or base motives, to understand, to not judge their motives, just tounderstand them, and then to work. I think if the young writer cancan followthose three rules, he can make his own rules [that] suit hisparticular case as he goes along, but they are good general rules I think for ayoung writer to follow.Sir, you said he has to read the good books. What were the good booksthat you read? By the good books, I mean the books that havepeople still read ahundred and two and three hundred years afterwards, and theywould be what we call the classics. There are good books printedtoday, but I meant only books that people have still read enough, so that theyare still remembered and still known. [It doesn't mean the]books themselves are good. It means that they were good enough that people stilllike to read them, and since they have continued to read them for these onehundred or two or three hundred years, they'll probably continue for anotherthree or four hundred years.  Sir, must a writer always be objective or must he get in and actually sort of live what he is writing about?In other words, make ita part of thean integral part of his life? To be completely objective,you'll become a reporter. I used to thinkthat it took talent to be a writer, but now I think it takes mostly insight.That means toto wonder, to speculate always why people do what they do,and you've got to get inside people. You've got to love people at the same timethat you hate people to do that. You can't be on the outside. Then you're justa reporter. You've got to be in the middle of life to write about it, and that'swhat you're writing about, you know, is life, is[motion]. Can a writercan he write without ever passing judgment on hischaracters? Iwell, heI doubt if you can know anybody, an imaginary characteroror living person without passing judgment on them. That'sthat's a little tooGod-like. You've got to pass judgment.You've got to love, you've got to hate,even, the character that you have created yourself. what is yourobjective in using long sentences over short sentences? Do you thinkis that astream-of-consciousness effect or do you feel you can convey your thoughtseasier by them? That is a matter of the carpenter trying to find the hammer or theaxe that he thinks willwill do the best job. Another thing iseveryone has aforeknowledge of death. That is, he will have only a very short timecomparatively to do the work, and he is trying to put the whole history ofthe human heart on the head of a pin, you might say. Also, to me, no man ishimself. He is the sum of his past. There's no such thing really as "was,"because the past is. It is a part ofofof every man, every woman, at everymoment. All of his and her ancestry, background, is all a part of himof himself andherself, at any moment. And so a man, a character in a story, at any moment ofaction, is not just himself as he is then. He is all that made himand the long sentence is an attempt to get his past and possiblyhis future into the instant in which he does something. But to me, what he doesis not quite as important as who he is, the fact that he is acontinuity, that he has come a long way, that he has endured and he is, I hope,we hope, better thanthan his ancestors were, that he's morecompassionate. He's more tolerant. We hope braver, more honest.  a few weeks ago the Richmond papers quoted you as havingorganized [in ascending order of excellence][American] writers[you admire]. Would you be willing to suggest what thecriterion was, ? The criterion was failure. My feeling is that we all fail, that none ofit is as good as we all wanted it to be. None of my stuff is as good as I wantedit to be. That's why I keep on writing another one, and so I rated these people only by what I called the splendor ofthe failure. The one that made the most magnificent failure I rated first, not by the valuethat they did but by the splendor of the failure,the ambition, the aspiration to do more thanthan maybea human being can do, because you don't want to be better thanthanyouryour fellow writer. You want to be as good as anybody that everdid write. You want to be as good as [Dante] and Homer and Shakespeare and you can't,you fail, so you write another book. If you ever did that one time, then there'dbe nothing left for you to do. You'd have to pick uptake up a newtrade.I'm sorry. Well, this is more or less a question of fact. In TheSound and the Fury, was Jason Compson, did youwas he abastard? No, no, not anot an actual one, only butinbehavior. Do you find that it's easier to write thisthis wonderfulrolling rhetoric of yours than it is towrite a completely objective scene? For me, it is. I'm too busy trying to make my people come to life andthen I run behind them at full speed trying to keep up with themand I put down the best I can. I don't have timeto think about style. I believe that anyone who spendstoo much time on style hasn't got a great deal to say. That if you have a lot tosay, you don't have time to think of style. You wish you could think of styleandand think of the material, too, but I don't believe that anyonecan.Mr. Faulkneroh, I'm sorry. In connection with that, do you revise much? I revise a great deal. I'm lazyI don't like themechanics ofof getting the words onto the paper. I will put that offas long as possible, so a lot of the revision is done here. Until I can't putoff writing anymore, then I begin to put it down, and if it's not right, then Irewrite and I rewrite and I rewrite until it's the best I can do.But I won'trewrite if I can help it. I like to get it all done so the first oneiswill do, [because I'm lazy]. Yes'm. what do you consider your own most splendid failure, [if you could tell us]? The Sound and the Fury, because I worked at it thelongest and the hardest. In that connection, did you write it in the order in which it waspublished? Yes.It was written in that order? Yes. I wrote the Benjy part first. That wasn't good enough, so I wrotethe Quentin part. That still wasn't good enough. I let Jason try it. That stillwasn't enough. I let Faulkner try it, and that still wasn't enough,and so about twenty years afterwards I wrote anappendix still trying to make that book whatmatch thedream.  I once read an article in which the writer speaking of theend of The Sound and the Fury, said that the wholepattern of the book does not become apparent until the very end, in the incidentin which Benjy begins to cry and blubber when they go left around the monumentand must turn to the right. Now, while I think that simply confirms everythingthat has gone before, did you intend that as the moment of revelation? No, sir, I did not. I was stillas I've just said, I was stilltrying to tell that story. In the first section, I hadn't told it. I had to tryagain. I had to try three, four times.I've always been afraid it was something I missed in the ending. I'm gladto have you confirm that. [Thank you.]Mr. Faulkner You say you write because you have a story to tell, and you try to tellit in the best way. How do you conceive these stories? Which comes first? It's the people. Suddenly people are doing something thatis tragic or funny, or something brave, ofof sacrifice that seems to me moving enough to be worth telling,and then after that it's a matter ofof invention totell the story.Well, how do you get the basic idea? I mean I don't know where it comes from.  are you conscious of any way or theme, any attempt that youhave more frequently , something that turned out to be a dead-end or ablind alley, and then did you put that in [terms] some otherway? Yes, sir, that's a matter ofof so muchas much ofthat as possible is done up here. I have written threemanuscripts that never did quite please me, and I burned them up. Butit'syou try, and you try, and you try to do the best you can, to makesomething whichwhich to you was passionate and moving,so passionate and moving that it wouldn't let you alone. You had to write it.And then youyou do the best you can to make it as passionate andmoving to anyone who reads it as it was to you, because it seems worthwhile,worth doing.Why do you suppose that it didn't work out in those three books? It could be that I didn't know enough. It could be that the people werenot good enough people. That theythey never didtheyneverthe books, the manuscripts, were never good enough for me topass them, so I just put them in the fire and got rid of them. You once disinherited Sanctuary in the preface Ithink to the Modern Library edition by saying it was a book written strictly formoney and that you hoped to make it as sensational aspossible If this is so, sir, why did you write a sequelto it in Requiem for a Nun? Well, I wrote that book to make a little money. I sent it to thepublisher, and he said, "Good, Lord, we allwe'll both be in jail ifwe print this,"so I forgot about it. I wrotetwo more books. They were printed. And then one day I got the galleys forSanctuary, and I read them and it was so bad, sobasely conceived, that I wrote the publisher to let'sdestroy it, and he said, "I have had the plates made. I have invested money init." At that time, he didn't have a great deal of money either, and I said,"Well, it'sI can't pass it like this, so I'll rewrite it." And he said,"All right, but you rewrite it then andand I'll pay half the new plates, and you pay half the new plates," so I said "All right." So I rewrote the book andmade the best I could out ofout of the first basestory, and that cost memy share of the plates was two hundred andseventy dollars at a time when I didn't have two hundred and seventy dollars. Igot a job [passing] coal at a power plant to earn my share. The book sold. Thefirst money I was to have, sixty-five hundred dollars, and the publisher wentbroke, and I didn't get that, which served me exactly right.  Yes,sir.Sir, do you think that man is getting better and better every day inevery way? I think that I think thatman tries to be better than he thinks he will be. I think that that is hisimmortality, that he wants to be better, he wants to be braver, he wants to bemore honest than he thinks he will be, and sometimes he's not, but thensuddenly, to his own astonishment, he is. Yes,ma'am.In reference to Sanctuary, when you were writingthis, did you have in mind anything like the rape of theSouth?I mean, there's been a lot of talk about that. Did you havethat in mind when you wrote  NoEither time? No. I was simply writing a story which I thought somebody might pay somemoney for.The first instance? Yes, and the second time I was trying to make the best I could out ofsomething that was going to cost me two hundred and seventy dollars.  When you wrote the Fable and moved over into a different background, what did you have in mind as a bigger successthan you had had before in your Mississippi background? That was the only book I ever wrote from an idea, and the idea struckme, who might the soldier really be under the splendid cenotaph with the eternalfire burning over it. Suppose that had been Christ? Suppose he had come back andhad been crucified for the second time. We might not have but one more chance.That came from an idea. That was the only book that was ever written from asimple idea. The others have come from my own people. Yes,sir.Young Gerald here was struck by what you said about good people and wantsme to ask you what you mean by good people. I mean that people want to be better than they are. Ibelieve that all people want to be better than they are, want to be more honestand more compassionate. I think that's the only reason the human racehashas lasted as long as it has, because it does want to be betterthan it is, that individual people want to be better than they are afraid theyare, and they do try, and they fail, but then suddenly, when nobody expects it,they are better.Then may I ask if all of these characters in The Soundand the Furythat you would call them "good people"? I would call them tragic people. Thethe good people, Dilsey,the Negro woman, she was a good human being. That she held that family togetherfor not the hope of reward, but just because it was the decent and proper thingto do.Jason was bad, wasn't he? Jason was bad, yes. Quentin was weak. Jason wasyes, wasbad. Do you think people are good because they want to be better or because? Well, that canit can be any number of personal reasons whythe individual wants to be better, but I think that inin general, manwants to be better than he is, that he doesn't want to be cruel, that he wouldlike to get rid ofof grief if he just knew how to, if he was justwise enough. He would like to get rid of war, for instance, if he just knew howor just wise enough, to get rid of greed if he just knew how.Do you think that [the amount]? I'm sorry. I couldn't hear.Do you think that the amount ofthat each person has determineshis [ability for goodness]? Determines his behavior, yes. Not his goodness, but his behavior. Hisgoodness isI like to believe, is a constant factor, but he can'talways match it, but he wants to be better than he is, than he's afraid he mightbe, and he tries.Sir, you indicated before that A Fable was adeparture in thatinsofar that it was the only book written from an absoluteidea, withwith regular city limits to it. But I findat least, I find,that the basic crucifixion image in A Fable occurs overand over again in your books. It occurs in Light inAugust. It happens in a kind of way even inin Sanctuary. It happens in Requiem for aNun, certainly, withwith Nancy. Isn't AFable simply a more positive way of approaching the problem? As a result, it might be. Remember, the writer must write out of hisbackground. He must write out of what he knows, and the Christian legend is apart ofof any Christian's background, especially the background ofaof aof a country boy, a southern country boy. My life waspassed, my childhood, in a very small Mississippi town, and that wasa part of my background. I grew up with that. I assimilated that, took that inwithout even knowing it. It's justjust there. It has nothing to dowith how much of it I might believe or disbelieve. It's just there. [When you have] time tothis story, did it becomemoremore real to you than the other things you do? Let me understand you. The story that I think of is more real than theactual writingWhen you're writing the story, does itdoes this come a lot closerto being reality than the things you do like eating breakfast or walking[down the street]? At the moment, I'm completely demon-ridden to get that story written,that nothing else matters. It's not that the world is not thereanymore. It's just that I'm too busy gettinggetting my story done topay much attention to theto the actual world, but it's still there,and I go back to it. Conrad Aiken once said that after he had written a story, the story thenseemed perhaps more real than the things which had happened, and that as hethought back on it, he felt that the thing that he had written was what hadhappened in his life as it had, as opposed to the actual fact. Do you find thatso or not? No, I don't. That's Mr. Aiken's own point of view. That's not mine toomuch. That mymy people areareare no more realthan the actual world, but no less real. That is, they have their placeinin life too, to me. Yes,sir.Is it possible that you project onto your characters a greatersophistication than they have?As I know that type of person, it seems to me thatthey're not quite as sophisticated asfor example, the Christian mythas they understand it, doesn't seem to me to be quite[yours]. The writer is not a reporter. He is using his imagination, hisobservation, his experience and, of course, his own warped ideaswithoutnot deliberately, but he can't help it. It's a part ofhis background, a part of his workshop, and possibly they are moresophisticated thanas I write them, than they are as they liveinin the world. I'm still trying to tell a story. I usethe material which seems to me to tell the story best, and it's not anydeliberate intent to make these people more sophisticated than they are. Itseems to meseems that is the best way to tell the story I'm trying totell. Back to talking about this matter of the good people, you said thatman wants to be better than he is and be more honest andbe more compassionate. Does thisin these terms, do you also mean to love more here or [is this] just another ? Yes, yes, you could put it that way.And man, in trying to be better than he is in this way, do you feel thathe can pretty much do this on his own? In other words  Not always. Sometimes he needs help. Not always.Can he rely on a power outside, beyond himself? Sometimes, yes, but the will to be better than heisis in himself. He may not be able to do it without help fromoutside, or from a greater power than he, but thedesire to be better than he is afraid he might be is inside him, inside hisconscience, unless he is an idiot, of course. Yes,sir. youthe book of yours which troubles me most,ispuzzles me most, doesn't trouble me at all, is As I Lay Dying. Somebody once suggested to me that theIthink there's thirteen characters in it, constitute reallythe separate parts of just one man. Is this so? No, they wereI wasI was writing about peopleagain.I took these people, andthat's a simple tour de force. I took thisfamily and subjected them to the two greatest catastrophes whichwhichman can sufferflood and fire. That's all. That was simple tour deforce. That was written in six weeks without changing a word because I knew fromthe first where that was going.  in A Fable and in some other places,you used the term "prevail" as over against the word "endure." Could you spellout for [me] what sort of ultimate victory you envisioned forthe use of that term "prevail"? I believe that in time man willwill get rid of war, just ashe has got rid ofof other evils. Little children don't have to workany longer. A man can no longer have his hand chopped off for stealing a loaf ofbread, that a lot has been done to get rid of povertyand hunger and misery.And in that way, man prevails. Ihow far he cango before through some of his own fault he eradicates himself from the face ofthe earth, I don't know, but he tries to improve his condition anddoes. Yes,sir. in reference to The Sound and theFury, again, is the "tale told by an idiot, full of sound and fury,signifying nothing" applicable to Benjy as it's generally thought, or perhaps toJason? The title, of course, came from the first section, which was Benjy. Ithought that the story was told in Benjy's section, and the title came there. Soitin that sense it does apply to Benjy rather than to anybodyelse.I see. Though the more I had to work on the book,the more elastic the title became until it covers the wholefamily.The most "sound and the fury" seems to fall in Jason'ssection, [in my opinion]. Yes.Thank you. In The Town, there are references to episodes forabout half a dozen of your early novels withto comment on them. Dothey appear there simply because they [mobbed in] belonging toyour background or were you consciously trying to tie together and to give morecoherence to The Town? The Town is the second of a trilogy. The firstone was called The Hamlet. These references are to thingsin The Hamlet.But therethere are references to other books than The Hamlet that I found, includingperhaps it's simply thefact that you used some of the same characters fromfrom the earlierbooks. That could be it, yes. I used the characters whicharemy people to me areare quite alive, and they move backand forth through these different books, and I myself no longer remember justwhere what character appeared. I remember that character, but I don't alwaysremember what he did.  I would like to ask if your people are derived principally from an areaor region of Mississippi, and if you think that was a way of life there that hasmore to offer than, say, if a writerperhaps tothe idea is that your surroundings as well as your own education and your own . I don't think people are that different. I think there is not a greatdeal of difference between southerners and northerners, and Americans andRussians and Chinese. That I'm simply using the background, thecolor, the smells, the sounds that I am familiarwith, but the people in my opinion are not that different. They could beanywhere. Of course they would wear different clothes, and their behavior mightbe a little awry from what it is in north Mississippi, but the behavior would bethe same. They would have the same anguishes, the same hopes, andtheyRussians or Chinesewould still want to be better thanthey are afraid they might be, and they would [both] try to bebetter.  you talk about yourso many of the things youwrite about come from your background. A good part of my family is from[Clarksdale], Mississippi, and Mississippians are proud ofyou, but you've shocked a great many of us.Iwonder, do you think that stems from a reluctance on their part to see some ofthe people you write about in their midst? Well, I don't know. There are not too many Mississippians read very much,and they're probably[and they] spend as much time as I do just writing. I'msorry that II shock mypeople of my own country, but I'm simplytrying to tell about people which I think areare astounding and marvelous creatures, well worth writing aboutin the terms which seem to me the best to make the story vivid andmemorable. What is the meaning of the title "A Rose for Emily"? Oh, it's simply the poor woman had had no life at all. Her father hadkept her more or less locked up, and then she had a lover, and he was about to quither. She had to murder him. It was just "A Rose for Emily," that's all. Does your criterion [apply, to say, the great writers of thepast]? No'm, the criterion for judging the writing ofthe past is the ones that I like to read, that I will read again and again andagain. I don't know of any writer of the present whowhosework I will read again and again and again, as I will read Cervantes, forinstance, or Dickens.  don't you believe that in a few hundred years, say, thatthere will be books produced, that were produced in this century, that will beread over and over again as Dickens [is read today]? Now that I can't say, for the reason that the writer is really toobusy with his own work to have much time to read what anybody else does, so Ijust don't know really what people are writing today. I dodo knowthat what I write ain't as good as I want it to be,and so I'm going to keep on trying to write onethat will suit me. I probably won't, but I intend to keep on trying. I've read and also I've heard the poet John [Neihardt] say that you have tomake yourself sit there and write something every day, that that's the way to doit, [whether it's]or not .How much is inspiration and how much is perspiration? Ithat system works with lots of people, but not with me. Inever had any trouble writing the stuff. It's persuading myself to sit down anddo it.Some people, that sort of discipline works with, butbut with others,itit don't. With me, it never would, that I put off writing as longas possible and then when I get started, I can write for ten or twelve hoursday after day until I getuntil I getStrictly as a matter of your choice of forms, doyou ever find yourself beginning a short story that suddenly blossoms or has toblossom into a novel, or [vice versa]?[Yes, sir]Or can you cite from the novels that The Sound and the Fury started as a short story.I thought it could be done in ten pages. Then I had written a hundred pages, andthat wasn't enough. I wrote another hundred. That wasn't enough. Anotherhundred. That still wasn't enough. Yes,sir.Sir, a great many of the people that Tennessee Williams writes about aresoutherners. What is your opinion of these people [that he writesabout]? Well, theI couldn't have any opinion of the people that hewrites about. I could have an opinion of theof the complete jobthat's done. The best ofof Williams, to me, was a play called Camino Real. I think Cat on a Hot TinRoof was written about the wrong people. The story was the old man'sstory. I think that the anguishes of children ain't worth three acts. Iknow we all feel greatly indebted to the University of Virginia for makingit possible for Mr. Faulkner to be here. We're indebted to Dr. Simpson whomade his [introduction] to the university. And of course most of all we'reindebted to Mr. Faulkner himself, for being willing to come along. I'm goingto ask Professor Gwynn of the University's Department of English to introduceMr. Faulkner. I've already found out that the only way to hold an audience is to be alittle higher than it is, and for a short man like me it's impossible to doit unless you are higher, so if it's all right, I'm going to stand up. Pap got up a good hour before daylight and caughtthe mule and rid down to Killegrews' to borrow the froe and maul. Heought to been back with it in forty minutes. But the sun had rose and Ihad done milked and fed and was eating my breakfast when he got back,with the mule not only in a lather but right on the edge of the thumpstoo."Fox hunting," he said. "Fox hunting. A seventy-year-old man, withboth feet and one knee, too, already in the grave, squatting all nighton a hill and calling hisself listening to a fox race that he couldn'teven hear unless they had come up onto the same log he was setting onand bayed into his ear trumpet. Give me my breakfast," he told maw."Whitfield is standing there right this minute, straddle of that boardtree with his watch in his hand."And he was. We rid on past the church,and there was not only Solon Quick's school-bus truck but ReverendWhitfield's old mare too. We tied the mule to a sapling and hung ourdinner bucket on a limb, and with pap toting Killegrew's froe and mauland the wedges and me toting our ax, we went on to the board tree whereSolon and Homer Bookwright, with their froes and mauls and axes andwedges, was setting on two upended cuts, and Whitfield was standing jestlike pap said, in his boiled shirt and his black hat and pants andnecktie, holding his watch in his hand. It was gold and in the morningsunlight it looked big as a full-growed squash.  "You're late," he said.So pap told him again about howOld Man Killegrew had been off fox hunting all night, and nobody at hometo lend him the froe but Mrs. Killegrew and the cook. And naturally, thecook wasn't going to lend none of Killegrew's tools out, and Mrs.Killegrew was worser than deaf than even Killegrew. If you was to run in andtell her the house was afire, she would jest keep on rocking and say shethought so, too,unless she began to holler back to the cook to turn thedogs loose before you could even open your mouth. "You could have goneyesterday and borrowed the froe," Whitfield said. "You have known for amonth now that you had promised this one day out of a whole summertoward putting a roof on the house of God.""We ain't but two hourslate," pap said. "I reckon the Lord will forgive it. He ain't interestedin time, nohow. He's interested in salvation."Whitfield never evenwaited for pap to finish. It looked to me like he even got taller,thundering down at pap like a cloudburst. "He ain't interested inneither! Why should He be, when He owns them both? And why He shouldturn around for the poor, mizzling souls of men that can't even borrowtools in time to replace the shingles on His church, I don't knoweither. Maybe it's just because He made them. Maybe He just said toHimself: 'I made them; I don't know why. But since I did, I Godfrey,I'll roll my sleeves up and drag them into glory whether they will orno!'"  But that wasn't here nor there neither now, and Ireckon he knowed it, jest like he knowed there wasn't going to benothing atall here as long as he stayed. So he put the watch back intohis pocket and motioned Solon and Homer up, and we all taken off ourhats except him while he stood there with his face raised into the sunand his eyes shut and his eyebrows looking like a big iron-graycaterpillar laid along the edge of a cliff. "Lord," he said, "make themgood straight shingles to lay smooth, and let them split out easy;they're for You," and opened his eyes and looked at us again, mostly atpap, and went and untied his mare and clumb up slow and stiff, like oldmen do, and rid away.  Pap put down the froe and maul and laid the threewedges in a neat row on the ground and taken up the ax. "Well, men," hesaid, "let's get started. We're already late.""Me and Homer ain't,"Solon said. "We was here." This time him and Homer didn't set on thecuts. They squatted on their heels. Then I seen that Homer was whittlingon a stick. I hadn't noticed it before. "I make it two hours and alittle over," Solon said. "More or less."Pap was still about halfstooped over, holding the ax. "It's nigher one," he said. "But call ittwo for the sake of the argument. What about it?""What argument?" Homersaid. "All right," pap said. "Two hours then. What about it?""Which isthree man-hour units a hour, multiplied by two hours," Solon said. "Or atotal of six work units." When the WP and A first come to YoknapatawphaCounty and started to giving out jobs and grub and mattresses, Solonwent in to Jefferson to get on it. He would drive his school-bus truckthe twenty-two miles in to town every morning and come back that night.He done that for almost a week before he found out he would not onlyhave to sign his farm off into somebody else's name, he couldn't evenown and run the school bus that he had built himself. So he come backthat night and never went back no more, and since then hadn't nobodybetter mention WPandA to him unless they aimed to fight, too, though everynow and then he would turn up with something all figured down into workunits like he done now. "Six units short."  "Four of which you and Homer could have alreadyworked out while you was setting here waiting on me," pap said."Exceptthat we didn't," Solon said. "We promised Whitfield two units of twelvethree-unit hours toward getting some new shingles on the church roof. Webeen here ever since sunup, waiting for the third unit to show up, so wecould get started. You don't seem to kept up with these modern ideas aboutwork that's been flooding and uplifting the country in the last fewyears.""What modren ideas?" pap said. "I didn't know there was but oneidea about workuntil it is done, it ain't done, and when it is done, itis."  "I see," pap said. "I see. It's me that's got tocome back. By myself. I got to break into a full morning to make up themtwo hours that you and Homer spent resting. I got to spend two hours ofthe next day making up for the two hours of the day before that you andHomer never even worked." "Maybe there's something else besides cash you mightbe able to trade with, though" Solon said. "You might use that dog."That was when pap actually stopped. I didn't know it myself then either,but I found it out a good long time before Solon did. Pap set there withthe maul up over his head and the blade of the froe set against theblock for the next lick, looking at Solon. "The dog?" he said.It wasa kind of mixed hound, with a little bird dog and some collie and maybea considerable of almost anything else, but it would ease through thewoods without no more noise than a hant and pick up a squirrel's trailon the ground and bark jest once, unless it knowed you was where youcouldn't see it, and then tiptoe that trail out jest like a man and nevermake another sound until it treed, and only then when it knowed youhadn't kept in sight of it. It belonged to pap and Vernon Tull together.Will Varner give it to Tull as a puppy, and pap raised it for a halfinterest; me and him trained it and it slept in my bed with me until itgot so big maw finally run it out of the house, and for the last sixmonths Solon had been trying to buy it. Him and Tull had agreed on twodollars for Tull's half of it, but Solon and pap was still six dollarsapart on ourn, because pap said it was worth ten dollars of anybody'smoney and if Tull wasn't going to collect his full half of that, he wasgoing to collect it for him.  "So that's it," pap said. "Them things wasn't workunits atall. They was dog units."  "Your half of the dog for that half a day's work youstill owe on them shingles.""And the two dollars," pap said. "That youand Tull agreed on. I sell you half the dog for two dollars, and youcome back here tomorrow and finish the shingles. You give me the twodollars now, and I'll meet you here in the morning with the dog, and youcan show me the receipt from Tull for his half then.""Me and Tull havedone already agreed," Solon said."All right," pap said. "Then you canpay Tull his two dollars and bring his receipt with you without notrouble.""Tull will be at the church tomorrow morning, pulling off themold shingles," Solon said. "All right," pap said. "Then it won't be notrouble at all for you to get a receipt from him. You can stop at thechurch when you pass. Tull ain't named Grier. He won't need to be offsomewhere tomorrow borrowing a crowbar."So Solon taken out his purseand paid pap the two dollars and they went back to work. And now itlooked like they was really trying to finish that afternoon, not jestSolon, but even Homer, that didn't seem to be concerned in it nohow, andpap, that had already swapped a half a dog to get rid of whatever workSolon claimed would be left over. I quit trying to stay up with themthen; I jest stacked shingles.  Then Solon laid his froe and maul down. "Well, men,"he said, "I don't know what you fellers think, but I consider this aday.""All right," pap said. "You are the one to decide when to quit,since whatever elbow units you consider are going to be shy tomorrowwill be yourn.""That's a fact," Solon said. "And since I am giving aday and a half to the church instead of jest a day, like I started outdoing, I reckon I better get on home and tend to a little of my ownwork." He picked up his froe and maul and ax and went on to his truck andstood waiting for Homer to come and get in."I'll be here in the morningwith the dog," pap said.   "Sholy," Solon said. It sounded like he had forgotabout the dog, or that it wasn't no longer any importance. But he stoodthere again and looked hard and quiet at pap for about a second. "And abill of sale from Tull for his half of it. As you say, it won't be notrouble a-tall to get that from him." Him and Homer got into the truckand he started the engine. You couldn't say jest what it was. It wasalmost like Solon was hurrying himself, so pap wouldn't have to make anyexcuse or pretense toward doing or not doing anything. "I have alwaysunderstood the fact that lightning don't have to hit twice is one of thereasons why they named it lightning. So getting lightning-struck is amistake that might happen to any man. The mistake I seem to have made is, Inever realized in time that what I was looking at was a cloud. I'll seeyou in the morning.""With the dog," pap said."Certainly," Solon said,again like it had slipped his mind completely. "With the dog." Then him and Homer drove off. Then pap got up."What?" I said. "What? You swapped him your half of Tull's dog for thathalf a day's work tomorrow. Now what?""Yes," pap"Yes," pap said. "Only beforethat I had already swapped Tull a half a day's work pulling off them oldshingles tomorrow, for Tull's half of that dog.Only we ain't going towait until tomorrow. We're going to pull them shingles off tonight, andwithout no more racket about it than is necessary. I don't aim to havenothing on my mind tomorrow but watching Mr. Solon Work-Unit Quicktrying to get a bill of sale for two dollars or ten dollars either ononthe other half of that dog. And we'll do it tonight. I don't want himjest to find out at sunup tomorrow that he is too late. I want him tofind out then that even when he laid down to sleep he was already toolate."  So we went back home and I fed and milked while papwent down to Killegrews' to carry the froe and maul back and to borrow acrowbar. But of all places in the world and doing what under the sunwith it, Old Man Killegrew had went and lost his crowbar out of a boatinto forty feet of water. And pap said how he come within a inch ofgoing to Solon's and borrowing his crowbar out of pure poetic justice, only Solon might have smelled therat jest from the idea of the crowbar. So pap went to Armstid's andborrowed hisn and come back and we et supper and cleaned and filled thelantern while maw still tried to find out what we was up to thatcouldn't wait till morning.  We left her still talking, even as far as the frontgate, and come on back to the church, walking this time, with the ropeand crowbar and a hammer for me, and the lantern still dark. Whitfieldand Snopes was unloading a ladder from Snopes' wagon when we passed thechurch on the way home before dark, so all we had to do was to set theladder up against the church. Then pap clumb up onto the roof with thelantern and pulled off shingles until he could hang the lantern insidebehind the decking, where it could shine out through the cracks in theplanks, but you couldn't see it unless you was passing in the road, andby that time anybody would 'a' already heard us. Then I clumb up withthe rope, and pap reached it through the decking and around a rafter andback and tied the ends around our waists, and we started. And we went atit. We had them old shingles jest raining down, me using the claw hammerand pap using the crowbar, working the bar under a whole patch ofshingles at one time and then laying back on the bar like in one morelick or if the crowbar ever happened for one second to get a solid holt,he would tilt that whole roof up at one time like a hinged box lid.That's exactly what he finally done, he laid back on the bar and thistime it got a holt. It wasn't jest a patch of shingles, it was a wholesection of decking, so that when he lunged back he snatched that wholesection of roof from around the lantern like you would shuck a cornnubbin. The lantern was hanging on a nail. He never even moved the nail,he jest pulled the board off of it,so that it looked like for a wholeminute I watched the lantern, and the crowbar, too, setting there in theempty air in a little mess of floating shingles, with the empty nailstill sticking through the bail of the lantern, before the whole thingstarted down into the church. It hit the floor and bounced once. Then ithit the floor again, and this time the whole church jest blowed up intoa pit of yellow jumping fire, with me and pap hanging over the edge ofit on two ropes. I don't know what become of the rope nor how we gotout of it. I don't remember climbing down. Jest pap yelling behind meand pushing me halfway down the ladder and then throwing me therest of the way by a handful of my overhalls, and then we was both onthe ground, running for the water barrel. It set under the gutter spoutat the side, and Armstid was there then; he had happened to go out tohis lot about a hour back and seen the lantern on the church roof, andit stayed on his mind until finally he come up to see what was going on,and got there jest in time to stand yelling back and forth with papacross the water barrel. And I believe we still would have put it out.Pap turned and squatted against the barrel and got a holt of it over hisshoulder and stood up with that barrel that was almost full of water andrun around the corner and up the steps of the church and hooked his toeon the top step and come down with the barrel busting on top of him andknocking him cold out as a wedge. So we had to drag him back first, and maw was therethen, and Mrs. Armstid about the same time, and me and Armstid run withthe two fire buckets to the spring, and when we got back there was aplenty of them, Whitfield, too, with more buckets, and we done what wecould, but the spring was two hundred yards away and ten buckets emptiedit and it taken five minutes to fill again, and so we finally all jeststood around where papwhere had come to again with a big cut on his head andwatched it go. It was a old church, long dried out, and full of oldcolored-picture charts that Whitfield had accumulated for more thanfifty years, that the lantern had lit right in the middle of when itfinally exploded. There was a special nail where he would keep a oldlong nightshirt he would wear to baptize in. I would use to watch it allthe time during church and Sunday school, and me and the other boyswould go past the church sometimes jest to peep in at it, because to aboy of ten it wasn't jest a cloth garment or even a iron armor; it wasthe old strong Archangel Michael himself, that had fit and strove andconquered sin for so long that it finally had the same contempt for thehuman beings that returned always to sin as hogs and dogs done that theold strong archangel his self must have had.  For a long time it never burned, even aftereverything else inside had. We could watch it, hanging there among thefire, not like it had knowed its timein its time too much water to burn easy,but like it had strove and fit with the devil and all the hosts of helltoo long to burn in jest a fire that Res Grier started, trying to beatSolon Quick out of half a dog. But at last it went, too, not in a hurrystill, but jest all at once, kind of roaring right on up and out againstthe stars and the far dark spaces. And then there wasn't nothing butjest pap, drenched and groggy-looking, on the ground, with the rest ofus around him, and Whitfield like always in his boiled shirt and hisblack hat and pants, standing there with his hat on, too, like he hadstrove too long to save what hadn't ought to been created in the firstplace, from the damnation it didn't even want to escape, to bother toneed to take his hat off in any presence. He looked around at us fromunder it; we was all there now, all that belonged to that church andused it to be born and marry and die fromus and the Armstids and Tulls,and Bookwrights and Quicks and Snopes.  "I was wrong," Whitfield said. "I told you we wouldmeet here tomorrow to roof a church. We'll meet here in the morning toraise one.""Of course we got to have a church," pap said. "We're goingto have one. And we're going to have it soon. But there's some of usdone already give a day or so this week, at the cost of our own work.Which is right and just, and we're going to give more, and glad to. ButI don't believe that the Lord "Whitfield let him finish. He nevermoved. He jest stood there until pap finally run down of his own accordand hushed and set there on the ground mostly not looking at maw, beforeWhitfield opened his mouth."Not you," Whitfield said. "Arsonist.""Arsonist?" pap said.   "If there is any pursuit inwhich you can engage without carrying flood and fire and destruction anddeath behind you, do it. But not one hand shall you lay to this newhouse until you have proved to us that you are to be trusted again withthe powers and capacities of a man." He looked about at us again. "Tulland Snopes and Armstid have already promised for tomorrow. I understandthat Quick had another half day he intended ""I can give anotherday," Solon said. "I can give the rest of the week," Homer said. "Iain't rushed neither," Snopes said."That will be enough to start with,then," Whitfield said. "It's late now. Let us all go home."  He went first. He didn't look back once, at thechurch or at us. He went to the old mare and clumb up slow and stiff andpowerful, and was gone, and we went too, scattering. But I looked backat it. It was jest a shell now, with a red and fading core, and I hadhated it at times and feared it at others, and I would have been gladI should have been glad.But there was something that even that fire hadn't even touched. Maybethat's all it wasjest indestructibility, endurabilitythat old man thatcould plan to build it back while its walls was still fire-fierce andthen calmly turn his back and go away because he knowed that the menthat never had nothing to give toward the new one but their work wouldbe there at sunup tomorrow, and the day after that, and the day afterthat, too, as long as it was needed, to give that work to build it backagain. So it hadn't gone a-tall; it didn't no more care for that littlefire and flood than Whitfield's old baptizing gown had done. Then we washome. Maw had left so fast the lamp was still lit, and we could see papnow, still leaving a puddle where he stood, with a cut across the backof his head where the barrel had busted and blood-streaked watersoakingsoaking him to the waist.  "Get them wet clothes off," maw said."I don't knowas I will or not," pap said. "I been publicly notified that I ain'tfitten to associate with white folks,so I publicly notify them samewhite folks and Methodists, too, not to try to associate with me, or thedevil can have the hindmost."  But before I could do that maw come back. She had aglass of hot toddy, and she went to the bed and stood there with it, andpap turned his head and looked at it."What's that?" he said.But mawnever answered, and then he set up in bed and drawed a long, shudderingbreathwe could hear itand after a minute he put his hand out for thetoddy and set there holding it and drawing his breath, and then he took a sip of it."I Godfrey, if him and all of them put together think theycan keep me from working on my own church like ary other man, he betterbe a good man to try it." He takentaken another sip of the toddy. Then hetaken a long one. "Arsonist," he said. "Work units. Dog units. And nowarsonist. I Godfrey, what a day!" [audience laughter and applause]Do we want to ask Mr. Faulkner anything? And let them be anything. Ithink if you try to rehearse the question first, it'sit's not too good. Whether it seems frivolous to you ornot, ask it. We'll take the gloves off.  Would you discuss the religious symbolism in TheSound and the Fury? That was not accidentalbut coincidental. The writer has a mass ofof lumber, just as the carpenterhas, from experience, observation. He is writing about people, and hereaches back into his experience, his observations, his memory, to get whathe thinks will be the most effective way to tell about the people he'stalking about, and so I was not writing religious symbolism. I simply used thatbecause it made, I thought, my story better.  Can you discuss the most important problem that you think faces theyoung American writer today? Yes, the most importantproblem is the pressure to relinquish individuality and belong to something,to become a member of a mass. That's what the young writer has got tostruggle against because any art is composed, created in complete solitude, and the man or the woman has got to be primarilyhimself. He's got to believe inin men and women as individual men andwomen, not just as a mass of people, and so the first problem of the youngwriter is the time he lives in, the pressure to belong to something, tobe a member of a mass of something and not himself. That's what [the youngwriter] .  I'd like to know if James Joyce had any influence in your work atall and to what extent? Yes, a great deal. It'sdifficult for anyone to say because I think a writer is influenced byeverything he ever reads from the telephone directory up and down,and when I was young, I readvoraciously with no judgment, no discretion, and notaste. I read everything and anything, and I'm quite sure it has allinfluenced me, but the writer, I think, is probably too busy to say, Now,let's see, I'll write a little Joyce today or [a little Proust in the morning]. He's influenced by it, but he he doesn't know how much because he'stoo busy. That's part of theof the lumber in his storehouse that thecarpenter uses when he's building his house or fence.  every once in a while an author reports that what heintended as a short story got out of hand and turned into a novel. Have youever had this experience and if so, what novel was the result of it? The Soundand the Fury began as a short story. I think my own [ratingis], first is the poet. Next is the short story writer. Thirdis the novelist. The poet can say it inin fourteen lines or maybe four. Theshort story writer has got to have a thousand or two thousand words to sayit. The novelist has got to have up to a hundred thousand, and I think thatwhat any writer wouldwould want to be is a poet. I think of myself as a failedpoet, that I couldn't be a poet andand had sense enough to stop trying andto use a method which I could use, and so any story starts out aswell, agood poet could put it in a poem, a good short story writer could put it ina short story, but the novelist, it takes him a thousand words to say whathe wants to say. The Sound and the Fury, yes, beganas a short story. I thought that that could be done in ten pages. It couldn't.It's not finished yet.  Yes, your play Requiem for a Nun was translated into French and put on the stage pretty successfully. I was wondering, do youthink that could be done here in [the States in an] Englishversion? Yes, it could be done. Thereason it's not done in America is I gave a young woman who wants to be anactress, and she hashas had bad luck. She's ambitious. She works hard, butshe hasn't been successful.I gave her the right to it and since she hasno reputation or name, nobody will put up the money it costs to put on aplay in this country, and I won't take it away from her. That's why it'sbeen knocking about Europe for about five or six years.   I notice in a lot of your books you use double words,words that are usually used singularly and that are joined together. What effectare you trying to create with that, and why is it in some novels you usethem in the beginning of the book and then in the middle or the end, youdon't use them that way? That, I think, goes back tothe constant fear that probably every writer has. Hehe knows he's a mortal. He has only aa limited number of years in which to work. He hasfound the world so amazing andand so marvelous and so moving that, Ibelieve Iby the world, I mean, man, human race, the human problems, that heis trying to get it all said before he dies, that he is inin a sensetrying to put the whole history of the human heart on the head of a pin, andhe is using any method that willwill do it, he thinks, the most effective,most moving way, and sometimes making one word out of two seems to me thebest, and then, again, itit don't seem to be the right way to do it. It'sthethat drive to get it all said while you canstill have time to say it, I think, was the reason for theexperimenting, the style, the method. That was the reason for Joyce. You mentioned that The Sound and the FuryFury was still not finished. I was wondering, do you feel that there'sbeen a definite advantage in having the story more or less overlapping withothers and keeping on [in terms of] continuity in anunfinished ? Well, it'sit's not finishedin the sense that  it's kind of a story more or less overlapping with others andkeeping on[continuity it it's unfinished]  Well, it'sit's not finished in the sense thatit's notit don't suit me. It's not as good asas I want itto be. None of my work is. That one I worked the hardest at, I lovethe best.And that one I'm moremore anxious to finishit in a way that'll suit me. I feel that if I hadn't written it andcouldcould go back andand do it over, I would do itbetter. Of course I wouldn't. I would do it the same way,but I wouldif I had the chance, I would do itbetter. Maybe it would please me [then].  when you were in Japan and talked to the young Japanesewriters, did you find that their problems were the same as the young Americanwriters? I'm sure they were, but it wasI never did touch the Japanese.They all spoke English, but it was like two people running at topspeedtop speed on opposite sides of a plate-glass window. You couldsee the mouth move, you could see the human features, the gestures, but therewas no communication, and then suddenly the paths parted, and one went this way. That was all. There was no communication. I'm sure their problems were the sameproblems, but their culture is so different. It's a culture ofof theintellectual process.The result doesn't matter, it's theit's for thewheels to click properly, which is completely alien to me, to anyOccidental, but I never did touch the Japanese. But I'm quite sure that their problems were the same as mine, and thatif we could've spoken to one another, we would have benefited both of us, but wesimply couldn'tThe published book about it sounded as though you had touched them verymuch,what they [asked]you seemed to have touched them. Well, I hope so, but I wasn't aware of it at the time. They would ask methe same questions over and over and then answer them themselves.I remember I saw the chief archer of Japan. Hehad been knighted by the Emperor. It was a ritual. The target was, oh, as farfrom here to the bookcase, and he would get up, and go through certain motionsto free his forearm from his kimono, and then he would paceforward so many paces and bow to where the Emperor would be. Then he would getup and go through some more ritual and fit the arrow to the string, and then hewould pace towards the target and stop and turn and do a sort of a ballet almost and draw the arrow back and let it go, and sometimes it hit thetarget but that didn't matter. Nobody cared, you see. He had .It was no trouble to hit it. It was only about asfar as the bookcase.I realize that I hadcommitted a fearfulit was more than a faux pas. It was lese majestysomehow. I had made a dreadful social error, andthat is the Japanesewe simply could not communicate.  what do you expect of the future of the Americannovel as it is today? I think that as long as man exists on the earth he will continue toproduce art. I think that the young writer whokeeps on writing, he learns more and more. He's got to waste acertain amount of his energy fending off from the pressure to make him conformto something, [to a group], but there's nothing wrong aboutabout writing inthis country. It goes throughdead times. It goes in cycles, andthe young man today may not come to his best powers until maybeanother fifteen, another twenty years. Then suddenly there'll beanother renaissance ofof writing in this country.What themes do you most expect to find [in these writers comingnow]? I'm sorry. I couldn't hear that.What themes do you think [you'd be] most apt to find in writers [comingnow]? Oh, the only theme that is worth writing about, that anyone ever haswritten about, which is the human heart in conflict with itself, its fellows and its environment, its people. You write about people, not about social conditions. They're onlycoincidental to it. The social condition is a part of the environment,whichwhich one writes from. That's part of your background, and hewrites from that just [as you do from the] observation ,but if you write about a social condition or an injustice, you're a propagandistor a reporter. The novelist is writing about people, the human heart in conflictwith the same hopes and fears and aspirations it's always had, no matter whatcolor of the skin or what race, and the young writer, if he willresist the pressure to make him conform to a group or a mass, then hewillwill learn that the only thing worth writing about is theindividual human heart and its own [problems] [in conflict with itself], man that wants to be betterthan he thinks he might be, and suddenly he finds that he is better, that he hasdone something brave or a man that wants to bebe brave and failed.They are the problemsto write about, not the socialconditions, and those are the problems that [are eternal.]They don't change. What I want to ask you, do you get any reaction from readers of, say,your translated works, where the non-American reader is difficult or hedistorts the meaning of American [words]? The only language I read with any ease is French, and the Frenchtranslations I've read have been very fine, I thought. The others, of course,I don't know because I'm not familiar with the language and know toofewwell, I'm not really a literary man to discuss booksand things like that. I'm a country man, a farmer. I write as a hobby [because it's fun].Any other questions? Whether you think it's silly or not, ask it.   or when younovelist, is the difference in what you what  No. I haven't had time to think about it. I've been too busy writingbooks.Thatthat goes back to how Ijust said I'm not a literary man, you see. I don't think of myself as havingany position, any particular niche in the establishment ofliterature. I think of myself as having a particular niche in the establishmentofof farming, ofof raising grain to feed cattle andhorses, but not as as a literary man, and I thinkthat probably when the writer runs dry, and he has nothing moreto say [or] know, then he begins to think of his positionas of literary import, but whilehe'she's busy writing, I doubt if he has the time to havethought about it too much because he's still trying to write abook which pleases him. That's why he writes another one because the one hefinished is not quite good enough to suit him, so he writes another one andtries it again.  I have a very specific question, which I think will comeunder the category of silly.Frequently, inyour works the story is told by a narrator, and his personality has a stronginfluence [in your work], and [this just] seemsto me frequently very similar to the use of the narrator that Conrad uses,particularly in Marlow. Had you, by any chance, read Conrad in your youth? Yes.And did it conceivably have any influence on your use ofsuch As I said, everything the writer reads influences him, but he himselfcan't say just how much what did when.But I'm quite sure that Conrad did,though Conrad wasn't the first one to use that method. Atthere's times when thestory itself demands that that method be used, that my experience is that once Ihave thought about the characters until they come alive, they stand up and casta shadow, then they take charge of the story. I run along at their heels at adead run, trying to put down what they say and do.They have taken charge, and they're the ones thatdemand which method shall be used. if you do read them, how seriously do you take yourcritics.That is, those people who write in the literary magazines, Hudson Review and so forth? Do you think it'sparticularly rewarding for students to read the critics of your work? I should think so. I don't read that [sort of thing]. I'mI'm too busy. ButI should think it might bebe valuable forforstudents to read that. I'm sure it would be valuable, but the writer, if he's asbusy as I am and has got as much that he needs to say as I have and knows henever will live long enough to say it all, he ain't got time toread what anybody else says about his work because he already knows what itis.It ain't good enough.That's why he's writing another. A young lady up here.  do you enjoy writing more about the people in your ownlocale of Oxford, Mississippi, than of other countries and nations? I write about the people in my own country because it's simpler. I don'thave to do any research. I know them.I'm writing about people, not aboutMississippians. I simply use Mississippi because that's what I know best. Idon't have to hunt around to keep from making mistakes thatsomebody would catch me out on,butII write toyes, I write because it's fun.Notfor glory but because it'sit's fun to do. Yes,ma'am.How great do you feel the French influence is on the American noveltoday? Now, that question I can't answer because the reading I do is the booksthat I knew and loved when I was twenty-one years old. I haven't reada new book in fifteen, twenty years,and I don't know literary or writing people, andII couldn't attempt to answer that question because Idon't know enough about it. But I would say that there is a greatdeal of influence because the French writers, the young writers, have been themostmost prominent lately. Sartre andand Camus. people like that, seemto be doing better work thanthan the writers of any other country atthe present, and I would say that they have had a great influence on the youngAmerican writers, [I think].  would you mind telling us what some of the books are thatyou knew and loved when you were twenty-one? Don Quixote, most of Dickens, Moby Dick, The Brothers Karamazov, Madame Bovary, the Old Testament. Ihave a one-volume Shakespeare which I carry around with me. Balzac, I read alittle in that every year. Conrad, I read some of Conrad almost every year.That'sthere're a few more that I don't recall now, butbut they are the ones I'm never too far from, and [I read] every year.  Yes, I thought of the whole story at once like a bolt of lightninglights up a landscape, and you see everything, but it takes time to write it.And this story I've had in my mind for about thirty years, and theone which I will do next, itit happened at that same moment thirtyyears ago and it was sort of a matter of getting at it.Is this a unique situation or have other sequences occurred to you likeQuentin Compson in both The Sound and the Fury and Absalom, Absalom!? No. I used Quentin in Absalom, Absalom! as aprotagonist. His story was in The Sound and the Fury. I just suddenly needed Quentin Compson. In thesense that he belonged to me, I just reached around and got him. .Mr. Faulkner? You're sometimes quoted as saying that Sanctuarywas a pot-boiler. Will you repudiate that idea? I would like foryouI would like to repudiate it for you if you[don't].  Well, that book was basely conceived. I hadhadwritten and had never made much money, and Iwhen I wasfootloose I could do things to make money. I couldcould run abootlegging boat, I was a commercial airplane pilot, things like that.ThenI got married, and I couldn't do things like that anymore,and so I thought I would make a little moneywriting a book. And I thought of the most horrific idea I could think of andwrote it and sent it to the publisher, and he wrote me back. He said, "GoodLord, if we print this, we'll both be in jail."That was about 1920about 1930, I think, when you couldn't saythings in print like you can now. So I forgot it. I wrote two more books. Theywere published, and then one day I got the galleys for Sanctuary, and I read it, andprobably it was because Ididn't need money so badly then, but anyway, I saw whataa base thing it was in concept, whatwhat ashabby thing it was, and so I wrote the publisher and said, "Let's throw itaway." He didn't have much money at that time. He said, "We can't do thatbecause I've had plates made, and that costs something." And I said, "Well, I'lljust have to rewrite it." And he said, "All right, you rewrite it, and I'll payhalf of the new plates, and you pay half of the new plates." So I rewrote it,did the best I could with it. I got a job passing coal to earn the two hundredand seventy dollars to pay my half for the plates for printing the book and thenthe publisher went bankrupt. I didn't get any money at all.So itI did the best I could withwith thebook. It was in a way, already in the public domain. I couldn't throw it away,andand I rewrote it and did the best I could with it.Mr. Faulkner You liked the characters in it enough, though, to write Requiem of a Nun later. Well, there was nothing wrong with the characters in it. It wasthe story itself, the first draft of it. The second draft was thebest I could do with it, and so I'm not ashamed of the second draft because itwas the best I could do. It wasn't good enough, but it was the best I could do,and they did establish a problem that demanded the question, whathappened?what could come ofof this marriage founded onthat?Any other questions, silly or otherwise?Well, we're very, very grateful to you, sir. Thank you, sir.Thank you, ladies. And I hope you will take Mr. Gwynn at his word of anything. No matterhow silly it might sound to you, ask it. I've talked to several young gentlemen,and they tell me that there's a feeling that the question has got to be one thatthe answerer will approve of. I think that's notnot a very good idea,so ask anything that you like.  sometimes I've heard it said that Joe Christmas in Light in August is supposed to be a Christ figure.Now, there's some allusion to that or perhaps some evidence for it. He died at 33[at] his lynching. There's a few things like that. Did youintend for him to be a Christ figure? No, not deliberately. That was coincidental. The writer hasa storeroom ofof recollections, of traditions, ofexperience, of observation, that he uses in his trade, just as the carpenter hasa storeroom of planks that he uses when he wants to build a fence or a house,and that's coincidental. I am writing about people, not about symbols, but whenit seems to me the symbol is a good trick to use, then I will usethe symbol.Can you put that microphone a little closer to you or something?Oh, it isn't? Well, I'llI'll try to speak louder then.Mr. Faulkner? This is a silly question, but I'm curious about your daily habits ofwriting. Do you make yourself write so often every day or do you [wait for the mood?] or? No, I am a very disorderly person. I don't know anything about discipline,and that system works with some writers, but it never has worked with me. I putoff writing as long as I can because I don't like the mechanicsofof getting the words down on paper. I put it off as long aspossible, and then when I can't put it off any longer, I seem to have generatedenough back pressure to where it goes for 10 or 12 hours somedaysometimes. Then I will go to bed and sleep, and I will eat. Then Iwill write again for ten or twelve hours the next day, until the steam runs out,and then I will do nothing as long as I can put it off.  In your book, Light in August would you say thatthe incidents that occurred therewere taken from lifethat you actually happen to know about or were they more or less yourimagination? Could youcould you give me some idea if it'shalf-imagination and half-truth or The writer has three sources: imagination, observation, and experience,and he probably can't say himself just how much of which he has used when. I dothink that he feels that he can improve just a little onon the worldas God made it and on people as God made them because he has got to do his jobin, well, five hours where God can take sixty years to complete aahuman being. I think that the writer himself don't know how much he saw, howmuch he imagined, how much he remembered, how much he read, but he certainly hasno compunctions about taking what he needs from any source. He will steal fromanother writer without hesitation.He will usehis own observation, his own experience without hesitation, no matter how unhappy or how shameful it might have been. Because he is trying tocreate flesh and blood people that will have three dimensions, thatwillcan stand up and cast a shadow behind them.  do you believe that all fiction has to be plotted at thebeginning, a body and an ending [in] your mind, or goahead and work it out? Some people have to have a plot, a framework, to begin on. I never didbecause I think ofof mine asas people, the characters, andonce they have come alive and have three dimensions, then they take charge ofthe story. All I do is to run along at top speed behind them and try to put itall down that they do and say. I've nevernever used a plot,andand in my own case, I would waste my time if I tried to think of aplot. I probably couldn't think of a plot. is your opinion of Tennyson in Light inAugust, as expressed by Hightower's remark that reading Tennyson is"like listening in a cathedral to a eunuch chanting in a language which he doesnot even need to not understand," is that your opinion of Tennyson? No, sir, that was Hightower's opinion, and I'm not responsible for hisopinion.I have a differentopinion of Tennyson myself, that when I was younger, I readTennyson with a great deal of pleasure. I can't read him at all now. I should think that his mother dinned that into him assoon as he was big enough to remember, and that he came deliberately to hunt outhis father, not forfor justice for himself, but for revenge for hisabandoned mother. He must have known that.That must have been inhisthe background of his childhood, that thisthisabandoned woman never let him forget that. Possibly, yes. Yes, when he located Sutpen, knew that Sutpen was awealthy man in his time, yes, he thought there would be gain, but Bon didn'twant gain, he wanted revenge, for his mother.Then isn't that [a fairly close] parallel to the wholeOedipus situation? No, I can't say. It may be the writer is so busy writinghis own characters that he hasn't got time to find where they follow classicalpatterns. It may be that since problems of the human heart are constant, theydon't change, that the dramatic shape ofof man'sconflict with himself and his fellows orand his environment do followa pattern. Maybe they'rethat the story of Oedipus was not the storyof Oedipus at all. It was the story of any man in that situation, that thepatternsthere're too few stories that one can tell. There're only twoor three stories actually, and any writer has got to repeat what was writtenbefore him.  you say that your characters create the situation. Do youknow your characters very, very well before you start your stories or do youdepend upon them, knowing them more thoroughly as you go along writing? I think I know them very well because of the laziness I mentioned. I putoff writing it as long as possible, but it's still going on, churning around uphere, and when they becomewhen I know them completely,that's when the urge is irresistible. I've got to get to work then. So I imaginethat I know the character pretty well, though they do surprise me, too, in whatthey do. When you write a series of books or two or three concerning the samecharacters, like The Hamlet and then a number of yearslater write The Town, when you finish The Hamlet, do you say yourself, "Well, I'm through with these people,there they are"?And you leave them with no intention of going on later andpicking them up again, and then they become active in your mind again, andyou've got to do something else with them, or did you have an idea of writing atrilogy when you started The Hamlet? That was a complete, intact idea. When I thought of Flem Snopes, I sawlike a flash of lightening the whole story, from Frenchmen's Bend on throughJefferson to his death. When I began to write it, I saw that it couldn'tbeI thought at first it could be done in one volume. I found out itcouldn't, and when I'd written about a hundred thousand words, I knew I had toquit. Nobody would read more than that, so it wouldhave to be another volume.But the storywas intact as soon as I thought of Flem Snopes. How far do you think the relationship between Charles Bon and Sutpenparallels what you consider the general racial situation in the South? It was a manifestation of a general racial system in theSouth, which was condensed and concentrated as the writer has got to do with anyincident or any character he takes, for the reason that he hasn't got sixtyyears. He has got to do his job inbetween the covers of a book, butthat isepitomized a constant, general condition in theSouth, yes. Yes,sir.Sir, do you think the South can handle the problem of[de]segregation and integration [better]if they are left alone or do you think that Calvinism or[narrow-mindedness] that you expressed in a lot of yourbooks is present [and if sodo you think that they willwon't get rid of it]? I think that the Southerner, the provincial backwoodsSoutherner, will have to be let alone because he ishe is ignorant, heis proud, and he is limited to where he will let nobody tell himwhat he must do. It's a childish sort of recalcitrance, thatanyonewhen he is told that he must do something, he will do theopposite just to show them. It becomes a principle with him. He knows that heis wrong, that he has a condition which must be changed, and he hasbeen trying to change it by his own methods. He's too slow about it. Heshould've known that this Supreme Court decision would be made. There wasa lawyer in my town that told people fifteen years ago that sooneror later the Supreme Court would have to say that, but nobody believed him. Theywerein theirtheir slow way, they were doing things to improve theNegro's condition. When the Supreme Court decision came out saying they must doit now, people that were working in their slow way toward it,took the other side. They say that the government shall not tell us what we willdo, can do, must do, in our own country, with our own people, with our ownculture and system. There are so many parallels of violence in your writings which suggestthe actions of the Ku Klux Klan.I am curious to know why you have nevermentioned it directly that I know of. Thethe spirit that moves a man to put on a sheetandand burn sticks in your yard isis pretty prevalent inMississippi, but not all Mississippians wear the sheet and burn the sticks. Thatthey scorn andand hate theand look with contempt on thepeople that do, but the same spirit, the same impulse, is in themtoo, but they are going to use a different method from wearing anightshirt and burning sticks. Thethe Ku Klux Klan isthe dull dreary minority. There's nothing dramatic enough in theKu Klux Klan for me to have needed to use that in a story, though I can't saythat some day I won't need to use it. Sir, I was disturbed by a remark you made in Absalom,Absalom! You said that Charles Bon made his half-sister the vessel oflove for his half-brother. I didn't quite understand that. I will have to read that book again. I don't remember that myself. I I will have toifMr. Gwynn would look up that passage for me, if you remember it, then I'll readit, and the next time we have a meeting, ask that again, and I'llmaybe I can have ananswer for you.Mr. Faulkner? I wonder if when you write you have a particular, definite effect in mindthat you want to achieve, or do you want the reader to bring their ownexperience into [focus]interaction which will produce immediatereactions ? Yes, but that is also coincidental. I think the writerishas thought of something from observation, imagination orexperience, of man in conflict with himself, with his problems, which is somoving that to him it is worth showing to other people, and he tries to show itto other people in the most effective way. If it seems to him it's bestto ask the reader to do a little work, too, then he does it thatway. If it's best to be explicit, he does it that way. But it's no deliberatedesire to make reading the reading difficult to anyoneat all. He is simply trying to show something which moved him so much, hethought it was important enough to put down on paper, so that other people couldsee that this was true, this was moving, this was funny or it was tragic, or thisis man in conflict with his eternal problems. Was the fact that The Sound and the Fury waswritten so confusingly the fact that it's a story told by an idiot ? Whywhyis it introduced backwards and forwards at different times? It seemed to be the most moving way to tell that story was to show whatthat idiot child saw. I wrote that. I thought that would be allof it, and then I realized that wasn't enough, so I had to write more. ThenI let another brother tell it, and that wasn't enough, so I let thethird brother, the second brother tell it, and that still wasn't enough, andthen I let Faulkner try it for a while, and that still wasn't enough. That bookis still not finished, that I never did tell something which seemed so true, andso moving, and so tragic, and so passionately beautiful to me that I wanted toshow it to people, and I didn't do it. It was a failure.  in The Sound and the Fury, can youtell me exactly why some of that is written in italics? What does thatdenote? I had to use some method to indicate to the reader that this idiot hadno sense of time, that what happened to him ten years ago was just yesterday.Thethe way I wanted to do it was to use different colored inks, butthat would have cost so much the publisher couldn't undertake it.Doesn't that go on with Quentin, too? Yes, because he was about half-way between madness and sanity. It wasn'tas much asas in Benjy's part, because Quentin was only half waybetween Benjy and Jason. Jason didn't need italics because he was quitesane.And another thing I noticed, you don't advise that people have to have asubject, a predicate, and a verb, and all those things.  Well, I think that's really not a fair question.I wasI was trying to tellthis story as it seemed to me that idiot child saw it. And that idiot child, tome, didn't know what a question, what an interrogation was. He didn't know toomuch about grammar. He spoke only through his senses.I'm referring mostly to Quentin, and he certainlyhe attendedHarvard. He should have known. Well, Quentin was an educated half-madman,and so he dispensed with grammar. Because it wasall clear to his half-mad brain, and it seemed to him, it would be clear toanybody else's brain, that what he saw was quite logical, quite clear.  in The Town do italics indicate timeannotation? Were the italics in The Town used as theywere in The Sound and the Fury? I don't remember that book either. That was a year ago. Ithink that the italics there were mostly for emphasis, though there could'vebeen times when I used italics to indicate that something definitely distant inthe past had been brought into the present. I don't remember, but thenthat'shas become more or less a universal trick, I think, to useitalics for that reason, to bring into the present something out of the distantpast. This is another nave question. In trying to get at a meaningthat ties all the characters together in Light in August,it seems that all of them, in one way or another, have been deprived of love inone form or another, and are trying to find something. Did it have some sort ofmeaning like that to you? That'sthat's possible. Of course, I didn't think of that atthe time. I was simply writing about people, but that'sthat'spossible. That'sthat's valid. But that too was coincidental with thewriter.Well, they were all put into difficult circumstances, more or less, cutoff, sort of. Well, yes, but then so many people are. So many people are seekingsomething, andandand quite often it is love. It don't have to be lovebetween a man and woman. It'sto bebe one with someuniversal force, power that goes through life, through the world. It could takethe form ofthe object of it could be a man or woman because that isaa part of man's or woman's instinctive nature, to havean object, an immediate object, to project that seeking for love on. Are youin yourin your statement just made, it seemsthat you are more a partisan of the Lamarckian theory of evolution than you areof the Darwinian theory. However, as you know, [clearly], themechanical version of the step-by-step process is not related to universal force whereas as you, just now, did, and Iwondered if you had obtained that idea by early reading of Butler, SamuelButler, who took Lamarckian theory I can't say. I think that there are some beliefs that maybeone inherits, that he don't have to get fromthrough an intellectualprocess like reading. Probably Ithat was simply a part of me, thatthere must be some universal electricity that holds this ramshackle earthtogether. Which one of your works do you prefer and [what] ? The one that failed the best, which was The Sound and the Fury. None of them are quite good enough to suit meyet. That's why I keep on writing another one. I like TheSound and the Fury because that gave me the most anguish, the mosttrouble.  I think a student's natural reaction after writing a paper,or something at least to hand in at school, is to hand it to his roommate orsomebody close to him and have him read it and give an opinion on it. Do you dothis after you've written a story or a novel? Is there anybody in your family orclose friends that you give it to and just say, "What do you think of this?" No, because I have more confidence in my own judgment than anybodyelse's, and I know that it don't suit me yet, so I have never thought of showingit to anybody else because I don't really care what they think. It hasn't suitedme yet. Probably if I do do something that does suit me, I will worry and harasseverybody to death to look at it.  Would you say that you work primarily to express yourself [or more]tocommunicate to others? I would say I write primarily because it's fun. In the book Sanctuary, could you tell us how youfeel about the story, or what brought you to write it, to bring itout? I have told this before. If any of you were at the class and heard it,please forgive us. I had written several books. I didn't need money then becauseI was single and footloose, and there were things I could do for money. I was abootlegger. I was a commercial aeroplane pilot. Then I got married, and I neededmoney, and I hadhad got the curse of writing then, so I thought Iwould make a little money writing a book, and I thought of the most horrificstory I could imagine and wrote it, sent it to the publisher and he wrote back,"Good God, if we print this, we'll both be in jail."So I wrote two more books and forgot about it.Then one day I got the galley proofs of Sanctuary, and Ilooked at it, and I didn't need money then probably, though I like to think thatI had gotten my breath and could see that the whole thing was basely conceivedfor a base purpose, and I wrote the publisher, "Let's throw it away." He said, "Wecan't do that because I have spent money to have plates made." And I said, "Well,I'll have to rewrite it because I can't let it be printed this way." And he said,"All right, if you will pay your half of the new plates, I'll pay half, and you canrewrite it." So I got a job and earned the two hundred and seventy dollars to paymy half of the new plates and rewrote the book, and this time, I did the best Icould with it. I'mI'm not ashamed of the book as it is. I'm ashamedof the primary base notion to write something to make money, whichI shouldn't have done, that I betrayed something somewhere whenIwhen I did that, but I did the best I could with the material as itwas, and so I'm not ashamed of the book now. It's not one that I would do again,but I'm not ashamed of it.  Yes, that's right. It wasI began to think, What would be thefuture of that girl?And then I thought of, What could a marriagecome to which was founded on the vanity of aof a weak man. What wouldbe the outcome of that? And suddenly that seemed to me dramaticandand worthwhile, but that wasyou're quite right. Ihadn't thought of that when I wrote Sanctuary.  from your remarks, I would say that you have a belief thatin developing the characters in the story that the writer also develops, maybe.Did I gatheris that correct? I'm sure he does, that the writer is learning all the time he writes,andand he learns from his own people. Once he has conceived themtruthfully and has stuck to the verities ofof humanconduct, human behavior, human aspirations, then he learns. Yes, they teach him.They surprise him.They teach him things that he didn't know. They do things.And suddenly he says to himself, "Why, yes, that is true, that is so." Referring to an earlier question, did you say that Light in August arguesfor the acceptance of an inevitably tragic view of life? I wouldn't think so, that the only person in that book that accepted atragic view of life was Christmas, because he didn't know what he was and so hedeliberately repudiated man. He didn't belong to man any longer. He deliberatelyrepudiated man. The others seemed to me to have had a very finebelief inin life, in the basic possibility for happiness andgoodnessByron Bunch and Lena Grove, to have gone to all thattrouble. This genealogy with all these people that were connected with each other,the McCaslins and everybodywas that made up before the books werewritten or as each one was written? No, that came along as these people appeared. I would thinkofof one character to write a story about, and suddenly he would dragin a lot of people I never saw or heard of before,and so the genealogy developeditself.  some of your names in your books are very suggestive, veryhighly suggestive. I wonder if it's that or just pure coincidence or did you intendto make names like Gail Hightower, Joanna Burden asbeing symbolic of their own personal character? Well, that is out of the tradition of thepre  memory of the old miracle plays,the morality plays in early English literature, Chaucer. Well, only Sutpen had a grand design. Snopes's design was prettybase. He just wanted to get rich. He didn't care how. Sutpen wanted toget rich only incidentally. He wanted to take revenge for all theredneck people against the aristocrat who told him to go around to theback door. He wanted to show that he could establish a dynasty, too. Hecould make himself a king and raise aa line of princes. No, no, he only found out when he thought it was almost too latethat he'd have to have respectability. He didn't want it until he found outhe had to have it. He would have done without it if he could,but he suddenly had to have it.  In this democracy of ours, is not money an assumed respectabilityregardless of conduct? Not always. I imagine a man like Dave Beck ain'tvery interested in respectability.Hedon't symbolize respectability, but he's got a lot of money. This callous attitude of Sutpen and Flem Snopes, this ability to usepeople without realizing they're people, [sort of]dehumanizing them, it seems to progress and get worse as they go from thecountry into towns and cities. Is thatis that a definiteis that aconscious thing? It didn't get worse because they came into cities. They had to comeinto cities to find more people to use. But itit got worse because of thecontempt whichwhich the ability to use people develops in anyone. There arevery few people that have enough grandeur of soul to be able to usepeople and not develop contempt for. And thatthe contempt for peoplecame not because they moved to the city, but out of success.  When did you think of the title of Light in Augustfor your book? Was it after you had written the story,andand what is it [exactly]? To me, to ato people in my country, that is aa pleasant,evocative sentence. There's a certain quality that for a little while inthe month of August light has, that it has at no other time. There's aaluminosity in which something pagan might live and flourish just for a fewdays. That's all it meant. It was just a nice, pleasant, evocative sentenceto me. It really has little to do with the book.  I have two questions. One of them relates to this idea of money.Wouldn't you say that the gentleman is confusing the traditions of the Northwith the traditions of the South?TheSouth, the Old South, is best pictured in the ideals in the story "A Rosefor Emily," where the old woman gets along without the money and keeps upthe family traditions. Don't you think that there would be a distinction asfar as the respectability in this? Yes, there is. In the South respectability has little connectionwith money. Money don't hurt the respectability, but the respectabilitydon't need the money in the South. You're quite right.Wouldn't this be shown in The Sound and theFury, too? Jason would be trying to get money, whereas the rest ofthe family, they don't care, and the Negroes really regard them asrespectable people. That's right, yes.They regard Jason as white trash. Yes, that's right.And I would like to ask you on this business of the Old South and theNew South, in "The Bear," where the young boy returns as a man and sees theforest cut down, I would like to know, do you like the Old South or the NewSouth better?  Well, the New South has got too many people in it, and it ischanging the country too much. It' hasitit gets rid ofof thepart of Mississippi that I liked when I waswhen I was young, which was theforest. Though it's foolish to be against progress because everyone is apart of progress, and he'll have no other chance except this one, so heit'ssilly not to cope with it, to compromise with it, cope with it. Probablyanyone remembers with something of nostalgia thehis young years. He forgetsthe unpleasant, the unhappy things that happened, he remembers only thenice things, and so maybe the northerner feels the same way about the OldNorth and the New North that the southerner feels about the Old South andthe New South.  Sir, about this New South, this last Supreme Court school decisionhas made all the states around here go through quite a bit of gyrations,plotting and planning things, but [very little is] heardabout or seen in the newspapers about what Mississippi, for instance, plansto do about it, or what is being done, or what they're thinking. I waswondering whether you could [give some light on that]? Well, Mississippi is pretty well on record about what they thinkandand what they're going to do. They have proved it two or three times,and that will be the last stronghold ofof the obsolescence whichinsists that a minority of seventeen million people still must be secondrate, second class citizens. We will be the ones that will hold onto that aftereverybody else has realized that it just don't work any longer. We willstill believe that it can be made somehow to work.  [in] part answer to the gentleman'squestion, I think in a recent Life magazine, therewas an article about your governor. It was citing the progress being made inMississippi asas far as the schools were concerned, how the governor will,just as you said, he will stand by segregation until his last dying breath,but he will do all that he can to improve the coloredschools. This one is a better man than anybody in Mississippi expected. Iimagine if they had known his true sentiments, they would never have electedhim in Mississippi.And he isI have hadsome correspondence with him since he was elected, and every now and then hesends me copies of letters he writes to his legislature, and every now andthen he quotes me, things that I have said on the subject of segregation.And he is someone that realizes, that sees that this is anobsolescence that simply ain't going to work any longer. Something must bedone about it. But he has got to represent his state, too, and he cannotcome out for a sudden abolishment of segregation, but he knows thatsomething must be done, and he thinks that, as a lot of people inMississippi do, that all the Negro wants is equality, is educational,economic equality, that he don't want to mix with white people any more thanwhite people want to mix with him, and the governor says that if he hasdecent schools, as good schools as he could get anywhere, if he hashas theright to go where he wants to into white churches, if he wants to go there,into the white stores as he can do, that that will solve the question. Assomeone has said, apparently the difficulty is the Mississippian don't wantthe Negro to sit down with him. They can stand up, that's alright. Theycan ride in the same elevator, but they can't sit in the same church. Maybeif everybody stood up in church, the Negro could come in, too. Mr. Faulkner In your book As I Lay Dying, do youyou feel that you strayed from your main mission of writing, that is, thewriting of people, since what I feel is the main character in that, thedead grandmother, who suffered the majority of the pain and the tormentin having her face have auger holes bored in it and floating down the creekin a coffin and eventually burning the barn. Sheshe, being dead, could feelnone of this torment, and I just wondered if that was sort of an aside fromyour main mission in writing about people, since she being dead is no longera person. No, I don't think so. I was writing about people. I took a familyofof the people that I know well. I don't mean that Ithat the Bundrensactually live in Mississippi, but theirtheir kind live there. That was tourde force. I simply took this group ofof country people and subjected themto the two great catastrophes, flood and fire. That was simple tour deforce. I wrote that in about six weeks without changing a word, because Iknew from the beginning where that book was going, because that, in a way,did have a plot.  Sir, did Joyce's UlyssesUlysses have anyaffect on Light in August? It has probably had influence on everything I ever wrote, just likeeverything else I ever read has, from the telephone directory up and down. I think that everything the writerreads influences his work, that he is completely amoral, he has no hesitancywhatever about taking what he wants from any source he wants, because heknows that anyone after him is welcome to use anything that he hasdiscovered or invented. But I don't believe the writer has time to say,"Now, I'm going to write a book and let Joyce influence it," or "I'm goingto write a book and let Flaubert influence it." He is simply writing aboutpeople, and he useshe reaches back in his lumber room and gets whateverplank fits the [corner].  I just wanted to say that the theory of parallel cases in evolution,of two plants at the opposite ends of the country developing in the same way,and I don't see why it couldn't happen in the writer's experience, that it wasthat certain devices were the same, shouldn't necessarily mean that perhaps one wasinfluenced by the other,to be able to develop from the writerin parallel cases [with] perhaps no communication, and Iwondered ifis that's the case in Light in August, ?? Itit could well be because there are only a limited number ofstories to tell and only a limited number of ways in which to tell them, sothat's something that the writer couldn't answer either, whether thatwas some form of osmosis, or whether it was an actual cribbing from whathe had read, or whether two impulses did develop foratat poles apart.Heit's impossible to say.Though I agree with your theory, that that's verypossible, that it could be done, because there're so few stories to tell, sofew methods to tell them in. Thank you.  I've had no trouble yet when I have been in New England. I wouldhave to listen to it and get into the habit ofof remembering to use theirown terms, their own diction, but there was no difficulty aboutunderstanding what they meant.Well, you have dealt with English speech inin some of your shortstories and French speech in A Fable, it seems tome. Probably not. The colonel wouldn't have said "whupped." Hebybynature, he might'vehave said "whupped," but he had associated with gentlefolk and other plantation owners long enough to have said "whipped" withoutknowing he was changing his speech. But Wash would still have said"whupped," just like the Negro would say "whupped." Oror a gob [That's right.A blob], yes. I'veI've heard that in England. Mmhmm. The overwhelming.I think that's one of the most interesting passages from the point ofview of what happens to speech under the stress of strong emotion. At thebeginning of his sermon he speaks very properly and with elegantenunciation [and diction].And at the end, there's an immense difference, I think. Yes. That's right. That's rightWe're off the air, fellows.Well how about it? Why don't you ask it? We'll save that for next week then. No, he would have said "shur." There would be a little "r." And with Wash there wouldn't be one.One of the most interesting words I found, I think, is "sholly." WhenInotice peace officers very often seem to say that in the books. Yes. It's the onlyonly reading a lot of them do. And it's the onlyspeech delivered by one[introductory announcer] individual.No, I don't know that we'd be interested in hearing itwould you?Gentlemen, I had a speech all prepared tonight, but I've forgottenwhat it was.So I'll just say that I wouldlike to introduce to you an old hand on this campus. He's been around solong now that he's really become one of us: Mr. William Faulkner, who isgoing to entertain you now.   When he and Uncle Buck ran back to the house fromdiscovering that Tomey's Turl had run again, they heard Uncle Buddycursing and bellowing in the kitchen, then the fox and the dogs came outof the kitchen and crossed the hall into the dogs' room and they heardthem run through the dogs' room into his and Uncle Buck's room then theysaw them cross the hall again into Uncle Buddy's room and heard them runthrough Uncle Buddy's room into the kitchen again and this time itsounded like the whole kitchen chimney had come down and Uncle Buddybellowing like a steamboat blowing and this time the fox and the dogsand five or six sticks of firewood all came out of the kitchen togetherwith Uncle Buddy in the middle of them hitting at everything in sightwith another stick. It was a good race.  When he and Uncle Buck ran into their room to getUncle Buck's necktie, the fox had treed behind the clock on the mantel.Uncle Buck got the necktie from the drawer and kicked the dogs off andlifted the fox down by the scruff of the neck and shoved it back intothe crate under the bed and they went to the kitchen, where Uncle Buddywas picking the breakfast up out of the ashes and wiping it off with hisapron. "What in damn's hell do you mean," he said, "turning that damnfox out with the dogs all loose in the house?" "Damn the fox,"Uncle Buck said. "Tomey's Turl has broke out again. Give me and Casssome breakfast quick. We might just barely catch him before he getsthere."  Because they knew exactly where Tomey's Turl hadgone, he went there every time he could slip off, which was about twicea year. He was heading for Mr Hubert Beauchamp's place just over theedge of the next county, that Mr Hubert's sister, Miss Sophonsiba (MrHubert was a bachelor too, like Uncle Buck and Uncle Buddy) was stilltrying to make people call Warwick after the place in England that shesaid Mr Hubert was probably the true earl of only he never even hadenough pride, not to mention energy, to take the trouble to establishhis just rights. Tomey's Turl would go there to hang around Mr Hubert'sgirl, Tennie, until somebody came and got him. They couldn't keep him athome by buying Tennie from Mr Hubert because Uncle Buck said he andUncle Buddy had so many niggers already that they could hardly walkaround on their own land for them, and they couldn't sell Tomey's Turlto Mr Hubert because Mr Hubert said he not only wouldn't buy Tomey'sTurl, he wouldn't have that damn white half-McCaslin on his place evenas a free gift, not even if Uncle Buck and Uncle Buddy were to pay boardand keep for him. And if somebody didn't go and get Tomey's Turl rightaway, Mr Hubert would fetch him back himself, bringing Miss Sophonsiba,and they would stay for a week or longer, Miss Sophonsiba living inUncle Buddy's room and Uncle Buddy moved clean out of the house,sleeping in one of the cabins in the quarters where the niggers used tolive in his great-grandfather's time until his great-grandfatherdied and Uncle Buck and Uncle Buddy moved all the niggers into the bighouse which his great-grandfather had not had time to finish, and noteven doing the cooking while they were there and not even coming to thehouse any more except to sit on the front gallery after supper, sittingin the darkness between Mr Hubert and Uncle Buck until after a whileeven Mr Hubert would give up telling how many more head of niggers andacres of land he would add to what he would give Miss Sophonsiba whenshe married, and go to bed. And one midnight last summer Uncle Buddyjust happened by accident to wake and hear Mr Hubert drive out of thelot and by the time he waked them and they got Miss Sophonsiba up anddressed and the team put to the wagon and caught Mr Hubert, it wasalmost daylight. So it was always he and Uncle Buck who went to fetchTomey's Turl because Uncle Buddy never went anywhere, not even to townand not even to fetch Tomey's Turl from Mr Hubert's, even though theyall knew that Uncle Buddy would have risked it ten times as much asUncle BudBuckBuck could have dared. Now did you want us to go tois that enough there, or did you wantus to go to the foxto the poker game?Yes. I think reading about the poker prowess. Andlet me see if I can[find this one now]. Not too long, yes.Oh yes, you can read itIf your voice doesn't give out.Let's see. You might explain it they're simply beentrying to catch Tomey'sTurl. Then you might begin about here where they are going backinto the bedroom again.  They ate breakfast fast. Uncle Buck put on hisnecktie while they were running toward the lot to catch the horses. Theonly time he wore the necktie was on Tomey's Turl's account and hehadn't even had it out of the drawer since that night last summer whenUncle Buddy had waked them in the dark and said, "Get up and out of thatbed and damn quick." Uncle Buddy didn't own a necktie at all; Uncle Bucksaid Uncle Buddy wouldn't take the chance even in a section liketheirs, where ladies were so damn seldom thank God that a man could ridefor days in a straight line without having to dodge a single one. Hisgrandmother (she was Uncle Buck's and Uncle Buddy's sister; she hadraised him following his mother's death. That was where he had got hischristian name: McCaslin, Carothers McCaslin Edmonds) said that UncleBuck and Uncle Buddy both used the necktie just as another way of daringpeople to say they looked like twins, because even at sixty they wouldstill fight anyone who claimed he could tellcould not tell them apart;whereupon his father had answered that any man who ever played pokeronce with Uncle Buddy would never misjudge him again for Uncle Buck oranybody else.  Jonas had the two horses saddled and waiting. UncleBuck didn't mount a horse like he was any sixty years old either, leanand active as a cat, with his round, close-cropped white head and hishard little gray eyes and his white-stubbled jaw, his foot in the ironand the horse already moving, already running at the open gate whenUncle Buck came into the seat. He scrabbled up too, onto the shorterpony, before Jonas could boost him up, clapping the pony with his heelsinto its own stiff, short-coupled canter, out the gate after Uncle Buck,when Uncle Buddy (he hadn't even noticed him) stepped out from the gateand caught the bit. "Watch him," Uncle Buddy said. "Watch Theophilus.The minute anything begins to look wrong, you ride to hell back here andget me. You hear?" "Yes, sir," he said. "Lemme go now. I wont evenketch Uncle Buck, let alone Tomey's Turl"  Uncle Buck was riding Black John, because if theycould just catch sight of Tomey's Turl at least one mile from MrHubert's gate, Black John would ride him down in two minutes. So whenthey came out on the long flat about three miles from Mr Hubert's, sureenough, there was Tomey's Turl on the Jake mule about a mile ahead.Uncle Buck flung his arm out and back, reining in, crouched on the bighorse, his little round head and his gnarled neck thrust forward like acooter's. "Stole away!" he whispered. "You stay back where he wont seeyou and flush. I'll circle him through the woods and we will bay him atthe creek ford."  He waited until Uncle Buck had vanished into thewoods. Then he went on. But Tomey's Turl saw him. He was closedheclosed in too fast; maybe he was afraid he wouldn't be there in time tosee him when he treed. It was the best race he had ever seen. He hadnever seen old Jake go that fast, and nobody had ever known Tomey's Turlto go faster than his natural walk, even riding a mule. Uncle Buckwhooped once from the woods, running on sight, then Black John came outof the trees, driving, soupled out flat and level as a hawk, with UncleBuck right upup behind his ears now and yelling so they lookedexactly like a big black hawk with a sparrow riding it, across the fieldand over the ditch and across the next field, and he was running too;the mare went out before he even knew she was ready, he was yellingtoo. Because, being a nigger, Tomey's Turl should have jumped down andrun for it afoot as soon as he seen them. But he didn't; maybe Tomey'sTurl had been running off from Uncle Buck for so long that he had evengot used to running away like a white man would do it. And it was likehe and old Jake had added Tomey's Turl's natural walking speed to thebest that old Jake had ever done in his life, and it was just exactlyenough to beat Uncle Buck to the ford. Because when he and the ponyarrived, UncleBlack John was blown and lathered and Uncle Buck wasdown, leading him around in a circle slowto slow him down, and theycould already hear Mr Hubert's dinner horn a mile away.  Only, for a while Tomey's Turl didn't seem to be atMr Hubert's either. The boy was still sitting on the gatepost, blowingthe hornthere was no gate there; just two posts and a nigger boy abouthis size sitting on one of them, blowing a fox-horn; this was what MissSophonsiba was still reminding people was named Warwick even when theyhad already known for a long time that's what she aimed to have itcalled, until they wouldn't call it Warwick she wouldn't even seem toknow what they were talking about and it would sound as if she and MrHubert owned two separate plantations covering the same area of ground,one on top of the other. Mr Hubert was sitting in the spring-house withhis boots off and his feet in the water, drinking a toddy. But nobodythere had seen Tomey's Turl; for a time it looked like Mr Hubertcouldn't even place who Uncle Buck was talking about. "Oh, that nigger,"he said at last. "We'll find him after dinner."  Only it didn't seem as if they were going to eateither. Mr Hubert and Uncle Buck had a toddy, then Mr Hubert finallysent to tell the boy on the gate post he could quit blowing, and he andUncle Buck andhad another toddy and Uncle Buck still saying, "I just wantmy nigger. Then we got to get on back home." "After dinner," MrHubert said. "If we dont start him somewhere around the kitchen, we'llput the dogs on him. They'll find him if it's in the power of mortalWalker dogs to do it."  But at last a hand began waving a handkerchief orsomething white through the broken place in an upstairs shutter. Theywent to the house, crossing the back gallery, Mr Hubert warning themagain, as he always did, to watch out for the rotted floor-board hehadn't got around to having fixed yet. Then they stood in the hall,until presently there was a jangling and swishing noise and they beganto smell the perfume, and Miss Sophonsiba came down the stairs. Her hairwas roached under a lace cap; she had on her Sunday dress and beads anda red ribbon around her throat and a little nigger girl carrying her fanand he stood quietly a little behind Uncle Buck, watching her lips untilthey opened and he could see the roan tooth. He had never known anyonebefore with a roan tooth and he remembered how one time his grandmotherand his father were talking about Uncle Buddy and Uncle Buck and hisgrandmother said that Miss Sophonsiba had matured into a fine-lookingwoman once. Maybe she had. He didn't know. He wasn't but nine. "Why, Mister Theophilus," she said. "And McCaslin,"she said. She had never looked at him and she wasn't talking to him andhe knew it, although he was prepared to balanced to drag his footwhen Uncle Buck did. "Welcome to Warwick." He and Uncle Buckdragged their foot. "I just come to get my nigger," Uncle Buck said."Then we got to get on back home." Then Miss Sophonsiba saidsomething about a bumblebee, but he couldn't remember that. It was toofast and there was too much of it, the earrings and beads clashing andjingling like little trace chains on a toy mule trotting and the perfumestronger too, like the earrings and the beads sprayed it out each timethey moved and he watched the roan-colored tooth flick and glint betweenher lips; something about Uncle Buck was a bee sipping from flower toflower and not staying long anywhere and all that stored sweetness to bewasted on Uncle Buddy's desert air, calling Uncle Buddy Mister Amodeuslike she called Uncle Buck Mister Theophilus, or maybe the honey wasbeing stored up against the advent of a queen and who was the luckyqueen and when? "Ma'am?" Uncle Buck said. Then Mr Hubert said:"Hah. A buck bee. I reckon that nigger's going to think he's a buckhornet, once he lays hands on him. But I reckon what Buck's thinkingabout sipping right now is some meat gravy and biscuit and a cup ofcoffee. And so am I."  They went into the dining room and ate and MissSophonsiba said how seriously now neighbors just a half day's ride apartought not to be so long as Uncle Buck did, and Uncle Buck said Yessum,and Miss Sophonsiba said Uncle Buck was just a confirmed roving bachelorfrom the cradle born and this time Uncle Buck even quit chewing andlooked at her and said, Yes, ma'am, he sure was,and born too late at it to ever changenow but at least he could thank God no lady would ever have to sufferthe misery of living with him and Uncle Buddy, and Miss Sophonsiba saidah, then maybe Uncle Buck just aint met the woman yet who would not onlyaccept what Uncle Buck was pleased to call misery, but who would makeUncle Buck consider even his freedom a small price to pay, and UncleBuck said, "Nome. Not yet."  Then he and Mr. Hubert and Uncle Buck went out onthe front gallery and sat down. Mr Hubert hadn't even got done takinghis shoes off again and inviting Uncle Buck to take his off, when MissSophonsiba came out of the door carrying a tray with another toddy onit. "Damnit, Sibbey," Mr Hubert said. "He's just et. He dont want todrink now." Missbut Miss Sophonsiba didn't seem to hear him at all. Shestood there, the roan tooth not flicking now but fixed because shewasn't talking now, handing the toddy to Uncle Buck until after a whileshe said how her papa always said nothing sweetened a Missippi toddylike the hand of a Missippi lady and would Uncle Buck like to see howshe use to sweeten her papa's toddy for him? So she lifted the toddy andtook a sip of it and handed it again to Uncle Buck and this time UncleBuck took it. He dragged his foot again and drank the toddy and said ifMr Hubert was going to lay down, he would lay down a while too, sincefrom the way things looked Tomey's Turl was fixing to give them a longhard race unless Mr Hubert's dogs were a considerable better than theyused to be.  Mr Hubert and Uncle Buck went into the house. Aftera while he got up too and went around to the back yard to wait for them.The first thing he saw was Tomey's Turl's head slipping along behind thelane fence. But when he cut across the yard to turn him, Tomey's Turlwasn't even running. He was squatting behind a bush, watching the house,peering around the bush at the back door and the upstairs windows, notwhispering exactly but not talking loud either: "Whut they doingnow?" "They're taking a nap now," he said. "But never mind that;they're going to put the dogs on you when they get up." "Hah,"Tomey's Turl said. "And nemmindnem you mind that neither. I gotprotection now. All I needs to do is to keep Old Buck from ketching meunto I gets the word." "What word?" he said. "Word from who? Is MrHubert going to buy you from Uncle Buck?" "Huh," Tomey's Turl saidagain. "I got more protection than whut Mr Hubert got even." He rose tohis feet. "I gonter tell you something to remember: anytime you wants togit something done, from hoeing out a crop to getting married, just getthe womenfolks to working at it. Then all you needs to do is set downand wait. You member that."  Then Tomey's Turl was gone. And after a while hewent back to the house. But there wasn't anything but the snoring comingout of the room where Uncle Buck and Mr Hubert were, and some morelight-sounding snoring coming from upstairs. He went to the spring-houseand sat with his feet in the water as Mr Hubert had been doing, becausenow soon it would be cool enough for a race. And sure enough, after awhile Mr Hubert and Uncle Buck came out onto the back gallery, with MissSophonsiba right behind them with the toddy tray only this time UncleBuck drank his before Miss Sophonsiba had time to sweeten it,and Miss Sophonsiba told them to getback early, that all Uncle Buck knew of Warwick was just dogs andniggers and now that she had him, she wanted to show him her garden thatMr Hubert and nobody else had any sayso in. "Yessum," Uncle Buck said."I just want to catch my nigger. Then we got to get on back home." Four or five niggers brought up the three horses.They could already hear the dogs waiting still coupled in the lane, andthey mounted and went on down the lane, toward the quarters, with UncleBuck already out in front of even the dogs. So he never did know justwhen and where they jumped Tomey's Turl, whether he flushed out of oneof the cabins or not. Uncle Buck was away out in front on Black John andthey hadn't even cast the dogs yet when Uncle Buck roared, "Gone away! Igodfrey, he broke cover then!" and Black John's feet clapped four timeslike pistol shots while he was gathering to go out, then he and UncleBuck vanished over the hill like they had beenlike they had run at theblank edge of the world itself. Mr Hubert was roaring too: "Gone away!Cast them!" and they all piled over the crest of the hill just in timeto see Tomey's Turl away out across the flat, almost to the woods, andthe dogs streaking down the hill and out onto the flat. They justtongued once and when they came boiling up around Tomey's Turl it lookedlike they were trying to jump up and lick him in the face until evenTomey's Turl slowed down and he and the dogs all went into the woodstogether, walking, like they were going home from a rabbit hunt.And when they caught up with Uncle Buckin the woods, there was no Tomey's Turl and no dogs either, just nothingbut old Jake about a half an hour later, hitched into a clump of bushes withTomey's Turl's coat tied on him for a saddle and near half a bushel ofMr Hubert's oats scattered around on the ground that old Jake never evenhad enough appetite left to nuzzle up and spit back out again. It wasn'tany race at all.  "We'll get him tonight though," Mr Hubert said."We'll bait for him. We'll throw a picquet of niggers and dogs aroundTennie's house about midnight, and we'll get him." "Tonight, hell,"Uncle Buck said. "Me and Cass and that nigger all three are going to behalf way home by dark. Aint one of your niggers got a fyce or somethingthat will trail them hounds?" "And fool around here in the woodsfor half the night too?" Mr Hubert said. "When I'll bet you five hundreddollars that all you've got to do to catch that nigger is to walk up toTennie's cabin after dark and call him?" "Five hundred dollars?"Uncle Buck said. "Done! Because me and him neither one aint going to beanywhere near Tennie's house by dark. Five hundred dollars!" He and MrHubert glared at each other. "Done!" Mr Hubert said.  So they waited while Mr Hubert sent one of theniggers back to the house on old Jake and in about a half an hour thenigger came back with a little bob-tailed black fyce and a new bottle ofwhisky. Then he rode up to Uncle Buck and held something out to himwrapped in a piece of paper. "What?" Uncle Buck said. "It's foryou," the nigger said. Then Uncle Buck took it and unwrapped it. It wasa piece of red ribbon that had been on Miss Sophonsiba's neck and UncleBuck sat there on Black John, holding the ribbon like it was a littlewater moccasin only he wasn't going to let anybody see he was afraid ofit, batting his eyes fast at the nigger. Then he stopped batting hiseyes. "What for?" he said. "She just sont hit to you," thenigger said. "She say to tell you 'success'." "She said what?"Uncle Buck said. "I dont know, sir," the nigger said. "She just saysuccess."  "Oh," Uncle Buck said. And the fyce found thehounds, They heard them first, from a considerable distance. It was justbefore sundown and they were not trailingthey were not, they were making thenoise dogs make when they want to get out of something. They found out whatthat was too. It was a ten-foot-square cotton-house in a field about twomiles from Mr Hubert's house and all eleven of the dogs were inside itand the door wedged with a chunk of wood. They watched the dogs comeboiling out when the nigger opened the door, Mr Hubert sitting his horseand looking at the back of Uncle Buck's neck. "Well, well," MrHubert said. "That's something, anyway. You can use them again now. Theydont seem to have no troubleno more trouble with your nigger than heseems to have with them." "Not enough," Uncle Buck said. "Thatmeans both of them. I'll stick to the fyce." "All right," Mr Hubertsaid. Then he said, "Hell, 'Filus, come on. Let's go eat supper. I tellyou, all you got to do to catch that nigger is""Five hundred dollars," Uncle Buck said."What?" Mr Hubert said. He and Uncle Buck looked at each other. Theywere not glaring now. They were not joking each other either now. Theysat there in the beginning of twilight, looking at each other, justblinking a little. "What five hundred dollars?" Mr Hubert said. "Thatyou wont catch that nigger in Tennie's cabin at midnight tonight?""That me or that nigger neither aint going to be near nobody's house butmine at midnight tonight." Now they did glare at each other. "Fivehundred dollars," Mr Hubert said. "Done." "Done," Uncle Bucksaid. "Done," Mr Hubert said. "Done," Uncle Buck said. So Mr Hubert took the dogs and some of the niggersand went back to the house. Then he and Uncle Buck and the nigger withthe fyce went on, the nigger leading old Jake with one hand and holdingthe fyce's leash (it was a piece of gnawed plowline) with the other. NowUncle Buck let the fyce smell Tomey's Turl's coat; it was like for thefirst time now the fyce found out what they were after and they wouldhave let him off the leash and kept up with him on the horses, onlyabout that time the nigger boy began blowing the fox-horn for supper atthe house and they didn't dare risk it.  Then it was full dark. And thenhe didn't know howmuch later nor where they were, how far from the house, except that itwas a good piece and it had been dark for good while and they were stillgoing on, with Uncle Buck leaning downleaning down from time to time tolet the fyce have another smell of Tomey's Turl's coat while Uncle Bucktook another drink from the whisky bottlethey found that Tomey's Turlhad doubled and was making a long swing back toward the house. "Igodfrey, we've got him," Uncle Buck said. "He's going to earth. We'llcut back to the house and head him before he can den." So they left thenigger to cast the fyce and followed him on old Jake, and he and UncleBuck rode on to Mr Hubert's, stopping on the hills to blow the horsesand listen to the fyce down in the creek bottom where Tomey's Turl wasstill making his swing.  But they never caught him. They reached the darkquarters; they could see lights still burning in Mr Hubert's house andsomebody was blowing the fox-horn again and it wasn't any boy and he hadnever heard a fox-horn sound mad before, and he and Uncle Buck scatteredout on the slope below Tennie's cabin. Then they heard the fyce, nottrailing now but yapping, about a mile away, then the nigger whooped andthey held the fyceand they knew the fyce had faulted. It was at thecreek. They hunted the banks both ways for more than an hour, but theycouldn't straighten Tomey's Turl out. At last even Uncle Buck gave upand they started back toward the house, the fyce riding too now, infront of the nigger on the mule. They were just coming up the lane tothe quarters; they could see onon along the ridge to where Mr Hubert'shouse was all dark now, when all of a sudden the fyce gave a yelp andjumped down from old Jake and hit the ground running and yelling everyjump, and Uncle Buck was down too and had snatched him off the ponyalmost before he could clear his feet from the irons, and they ran too,on past the dark cabins toward the one where the fyce had treed. "We gothim!" Uncle Buck said. "Run around to the back. Dont holler; just grabup a stick and knock on the back door, loud."  Afterward, Uncle Buck admitted that it was his ownmistake, that he had forgotten when even a little child should haveknown: not ever to stand right in front of or right behind a nigger whenyou scare him; but always to stand to one side of him.Uncle Buck forgot that. He was standingfacing the front door and right in front of it, with the fyce right infront of him yelling fire and murder every time it could draw a newbreath; he said the first he knew was when the fyce gave a shriek andwhirled and Tomey's Turl was right behind it. Uncle Buck said he neversaw the door open; that the fyce just screamed once and ran between hislegs and then Tomey's Turl ran right clean over him. He never evenbobbled; he knocked Uncle Buck down and then caught him up before hefell without even stopping, snatched him up under one arm, stillrunning, and carrying him along for about ten feet, saying, "Look out ofhere, old Buck. Look out of here, old Buck," before he threw him awayand went on.By that time theycouldn't even hear the fyce any more at all.  Uncle Buck wasn't hurt; it was only the wind knockedout of him where Tomey's Turl had thrown him down on his back. But hehad been carrying the whisky bottle in his back pocket, saving the lastdrink until Tomey's Turl was captured, and he refused to move until heknew for certain it was just whisky and not blood.So Uncle Buck laid over on his side easy,and he knelt behind him and raked the broken glass out of his pocket.Then they went on to the house. They walked. The nigger came up with thehorses, but nobody said anything to Uncle Buck about riding again. Theycouldn't hear the fyce at all now. "He was going fast, all right," UncleBuck said, "But I dont believe that even he will catch that fyce, Igodfrey, what a night." "We'll catch him tomorrow," he said."Tomorrow, hell," Uncle Buck said. "We'll be at home tomorrow. And thefirst time Hubert Beauchamp or that nigger either one ever sets foot onmy land, I'm going to have them arrested for trespass and vagrancy." The house was dark. They could hear Mr Hubertsnoring good now, as if he had settled down to road-gaiting at it. Butthey couldn't hear anything from upstairs, even when they were insidethe dark hall, at the foot of the stairs. "Likely her room will be atthe back," Uncle Buck said. "Where she can holler down to the kitchenwithout having to get up. Besides, an unmarried lady will sholy have herdoor locked with strangers in the house." So Uncle Buck eased himselfdown onto the bottom step, and he knelt and drew Uncle Buck's boots off.Then he removed his own and set them against the wall, and he and UncleBuck mounted the stairs, feeling their way up and into the upper hall.It was dark too, and still there was no sound anywhere except Mr Hubertsnoring below, so they felt their way along the hall toward the front ofthe house, until they felt a door. They could hear nothing beyond thedoor, and when Uncle Buck tried the knob, it opened. "All right," UncleBuck whispered. "Be quiet." They could see a little now, enough to seethe shape of the bed and the mosquito-bar. Uncle Buck threw down hissuspenders and unbuttoned his trousers and went to the bed and easedhimself carefully down onto the edge of it, and he knelt again and drewUncle Buck's trousers off and he was just removing his own when UncleBuck lifted the mosquito-bar and raised his feet and rolled into thebed. That was when Miss Sophonsiba sat up on the other side of UncleBuck and gave the first scream.  When he reached home just before dinner time thenext day, he was just about worn out. He was too tired to eat, even ifUncle Buddy had waited to eat dinner first; he couldn't have stayed onthe pony another mile without going to sleep. In fact, he must have goneto sleep while he was telling Uncle Buddy, because the next thing heknew it was late afternoon and he was lying on some hay in the joltingwagon-bed, with Uncle Buddy sitting on the seat above him exactly thesame way he sat a horse or sat in his rocking chair before the kitchenhearth while he was cooking, holding the whip exactly as he held the[spork or foon] he stirred and tasted with. Uncle Buddy had some coldbread and meat and a jug of buttermilk wrapped in ain damp towsackswaiting when he waked up. He ate, sitting in the wagon in almost thelast of the afternoon. They must have come fast, because they were notmore than two miles from Mr Hubert's. Uncle Buddy waited for him to eat.Then he said, "Tell me again," and he told it again: how he and UncleBuck finally found a room without anybody in it, and Uncle Buck sittingon the side of the bed saying, "O godfrey, Cass. O godfrey, Cass," andthen they heard Mr Hubert's feet on the stairs and watched the lightcome down the hall and Mr Hubert came in, in his nightshirt, and walkedover and set the candle on the table and stood looking at Uncle Buck. "Well, 'Filus," he said. "She's got you at last." "It was an accident," UncleBuck said. "I swear to godfrey" "Hah," Mr Hubert said. "Dont tellme. Tell her that." "I did," Uncle Buck said. "I did tell her. Iswear to godfrey" "Sholy," Mr Hubert said. "And just listen." Theylistened a minute. He had been hearing her all the time. She was nowherenear as loud as at first; she was just steady. "Dont you want to go backin there and tell her again it was an accident, that you never meantnothing and to just excuse you and forget about it? All right.""All right what?" Uncle Buck said. "Go back in there and tell heragain," Mr Hubert said. Uncle Buck looked at Mr Hubert for a minute. Hebatted his eyes fast. "Then what will I come back and tell you?" hesaid. "To me?" Mr Hubert said. "I would call that a horse ofanother color. Wouldn't you?"  Uncle Buck looked at Mr Hubert. He batted his eyesfast again. Then he stopped again. "Wait," he said. "Be reasonable. SayI did walk into a lady's bedroom, even Miss Sophonsiba's; say, just forthe sake of the argument, there wasn't no other lady in the world buther and so I walked into hers and tried to get in bed with her, wouldIwould I have took a nine-year-old boy with me?"  "Reasonable is just what I'm being,"Mr Hubert said. "You come into bear-country of your own free will andaccord. All right; you were a grown man and you knew it was bear-countryand you knew the way back out like you knew the way in and you had yourchance to take it. But no. You had to crawl into the den and lay down bythe bear. And whether you did or didn't know the bear was in it dontmake any difference.So if you gotback out of that den without even a claw-mark on you, I would not onlybe unreasonable, I'd be a damned fool. After all, I'd like a littlepeace and quiet and freedom myself, now I got a chance for it. She's got you, 'Filus, and you know it. You run a hard race and you runa good one, but you skun the hen-house one time too many."  "Yes," Uncle Buck said. He drew his breath in andlet it out again, slow and not loud. But you could hear it. "Well," hesaid. "So I reckon I'll have to take the chance then." "You alreadytook it," Mr Hubert said. "You did that when you came back here." Then hestopped too. Then he batted his eyes, but only about six times. Then hestopped and looked at Uncle Buck for more than a minute. "What chance?"he said. "That five hundred dollars," Uncle Buck said. "Whatfive hundred dollars?" Mr Hubert said. He and Uncle Buck looked at eachother. Now it was MrMr Hubert that batted his eyes again and thenstopped I'd like to ask you about Quentin his father. I think many readers get theimpression that Quentin is the way he is to a large extent because of hisfather's lack of values or the fact that he doesn't seem to pass down tohis son many values that will sustain him. Do you think that Quentin windsup the way he does primarily because of that, or are we meant to see, wouldyou say, that the action comes primarily from what he is, just abetted bywhat he gets from his father? when for a time you left that area to go to Francein A Fable, it must've appeared perhaps that it was a different aspect to this fundamental truth.That you were[Do they exist just in memory now]? "I'll buy the damn girl then and we'll call the rest ofthis foolishness off.""Hah," Mr Hubert said again. "This is the mostserious foolishness you ever took part in in your life. No, you said youwanted your chance, and now you've got it. Here it is, right here on the table, waiting on you." So Uncle Buck shuffled the cards and Mr Hubert cut them.Then he took up the deck and dealt in turn until Uncle Buck and Mr Huberthad five. And Uncle Buck looked at his hand a long time and then said twocards and he gave them to him, and Mr Hubert looked at his hand quick andsaid one card and he gave it to him and Mr Hubert flipped his discard ontothe two which Uncle Buck had discarded and slid the new card into his handand opened it out and looked at it quick again and closed it and looked atUncle Buck and said, "Well? Did you help them threes?""No," Uncle Buck said."Well I did," Mr Hubert said. He shot his hand across the table so thecards fell face-up in front of Uncle Buck and they were three kings and twofives, and said, "By God, Buck McCaslin, you have met your match atlast." "And that was all?" Uncle Buddy said. It was late then,near sunset; they would be at Mr Hubert's in another fifteen minutes."Yes,sir," he said, telling that too: how Uncle Buck waked him at daylight and heclimbed out a window and got the pony and left, and how Uncle Buck said thatif they pushed him too close in the meantime, he would climb down the guttertoo and hide in the woods until Uncle Buddy arrived."Hah," UncleUncle Buddysaid. "Was Tomey's Turl there?""Yes, sir," he said. "He was waiting in thestable when I got the pony. He said, 'Aint they settled it yet?'""And whatdid you say?" Uncle Buddy said."I said, 'Uncle Buck looks like he'ssettled. But Uncle Buddy aint got here yet.'""Hah," Uncle BuckUncle Buddysaid. And that was about all. They reached the house. MaybeUncle Buck was watching them, but if he was, he never showed himself, nevercame out of the woods. So Miss Sophonsiba was nowhere in sight either, so atleast Uncle Buck didn't givehadn't quite given up; at least he hadn't asked her yet.And he and Uncle Buddy and Mr Hubert ate supper and they came in from thekitchen and cleared the table, leaving only the lamp on it and the deck ofcards. Then it was just like last night, except that Uncle Buddy had nonecktie and Mr Hubert wore the clothes now instead of a nightshirt and itwas a shaded lamp on the table instead of a candle, and Mr Hubert sitting athis end of the table with the deck in his hands, riffling the edges with histhumb and looking at Uncle Buddy. Then he tapped the edges even and set thedeck out in the middle of the table under the lamp, and folded his arms onthe edge of the table and leaned forward a little on the table, looking atUncle Buddy, who was sitting at his end of the table with his hands in hislap, all one gray color, like an old gray rock or a stump with gray moss onit, that still, with his round white head like Uncle Buck's but he didn'tblink like Uncle Buck and he was a little thicker than Uncle Buck, as iffrom sitting down so much watching food cook, as if the things he cooked hadmade him a little thicker than he would have been and the things he cookedwith, and the flour and such, had made him all one same quiet color. "Little toddy before we start?" Mr Hubert said. "I dontdrink," Uncle Buddy said."That's right," Mr Hubert said. "I knew there wassome thing else besides just being woman-weak that makes 'Filus seem human.But no matter." He batted his eyes twice at Uncle Buddy. "Buck McCaslinagainst the land and niggers you have heard me promise as Sophonsiba's dowryon the day she marries. If I beat you, 'Filus marries Sibbey without anydowry. If you beat me, you get 'Filus. But I still get the three hundreddollars 'Filus owes me for Tennie. Is that correct?""That's correct," UncleBuddy said."Stud," Mr Hubert said. "One hand. You to shuffle, me to cut,this boy to deal.""No," Uncle Buddy said. "Not Cass. He's too young. I dontwant him mixed up in any gambling.""Hah," Mr Hubert said. "It's said that aman playing cards with Amodeus McCaslin aint gambling. But no matter." He was still looking at Uncle Buddy; he never even turned his head when hespoke: "Go to the back door and holler. Bring the first creature thatanswers, animal mule or human, that can deal ten cards." So he went to the back door. But he didn't even need to callbecause Tomey's Turl was squatting against the wall just outside the door,and they returned to the drawing-room where Mr Hubert still sat with hisarms folded on his side of the table and Uncle Buddy sat with his hands inhis lap on his side and the deck of cards face-down under the lamp betweenthem. Neither of them even looked up when he and Tomey's Turl entered."Shuffle," Mr Hubert said. Uncle Buddy shuffled and set the cards back underthe lamp and put his hands back in his lap and Mr Hubert cut the deck andfolded his arms back onto the table-edge. "Deal," he said. Still neither henor Uncle Buddy looked up. They just sat there whilewhile Tomey's Turl'ssaddle-colored hands came into the light and took up the deck and dealt, onecard face-down to Mr Hubert and one face-down to Uncle Buddy, and oneface-up to Mr Hubert and it was a king, and one face-up to Uncle Buddy andit was a six. "Buck McCaslin against Sibbey's dowry," Mr Hubert said. "Deal." And the hand dealt Mr Hubert a card and it was a three, and UncleBuddy a card and it was a two. Mr Hubert looked at Uncle Buddy. Uncle Buddyrapped once with his knuckles on the table."Deal," Mr Hubert said. And thehand dealt Mr Hubert a card and it was another three, and Uncle Buddy a cardand it was a four. Mr Hubert looked at Uncle Buddy's cards. Then he lookedat Uncle Buddy and Uncle Buddy rapped on the table again with hisknuckles. "Deal," Mr Hubert said, and the hand dealt him an aceand Uncle Buddy a five and now Mr Hubert just sat still. He didn't look atanything or move for a whole minute; he just sat there and watched UncleBuddy put one hand onto the table for the first time since he shuffled andpinch up one corner of his face-down card and look at it and and then puthis hand back into his lap. "Check," Mr Hubert said."I'll bet you them twoniggers," Uncle BuckBuddy said. He didn't move either. He just sat just like hesat in the wagon or on a horse or in the rocking chair he cooked from."Against what?" Mr Hubert said."Against the three hundred dollarsTheophilus owes you for Tennie, and the three hundred you and Theophilusagreed on for Tomey's Turl," Uncle Buddy said."Hah," Mr Hubert said, onlyit wasn't loud at all this time, not even short. Then he said "Hah. Hah.Hah" and not loud either. Then he said, "Well." Then he said, "Well, well."Then he said: "We'll check up for a minute. If I win, you take Sibbeywithout a dowry and the two niggers, and I dont owe 'Filus anything. If youwin""Theophilus is free," Uncle Buddy said."And you owe him the three hundred dollars forTomey's Turl." "That's just if I call you," Mr Hubert said. "If I dontcall you, 'Filus wont owe me nothing and I wont owe 'Filus nothing, unless Itake that nigger which I have been trying to explain to you and him both foryears I wont have on my place. We will be right back where all thisfoolishness started from, except for that. So what it comes down to is, Ieither got to give a nigger away, or risk buying one that you done alreadyadmitted you cant keep at home." Then he stopped talking. For about a minuteit was like he and Uncle Buddy had both gone to sleep. Then Mr Hubert pickedup his face-down card and turned it over. It was another three, and MrHubert sat there without looking at anything at all, his fingers beating atattoo, slow and steady and not very loud, on the table. "H'm," he said."And you need a trey and there aint but four of them and I already gotthree. And you just shuffled. And I cut afterward. And if I call you, I willhave to buy that nigger. Who dealt these cards, Amodeus?" Only he didn'twait to be answered. He reached out and tilted the lamp-shade, the lightmoving up Tomey's Turl's arms that were supposed to be black but were notquite white, up his Sunday shirt that was supposed to be white but wasn'tquite either, that he put on every time he ran away just as Uncle Buck puton the necktie each time he went to bring him back, and on to his face; andMr Hubert sat there, holding the lampshade and looking at Tomey's Turl. Thenhe tilted the shade back down and took up his cards and turned themface-down and pushed them across the middle of the table. "I pass, Amodeus,"he said. He was still too worn out for sleep to sit on a horse,so this time he and Uncle Buddy and Tennie all three rode in the wagon,while Tomey's Turl led the pony from old Jake. And when they got home justafter daylight, this time Uncle Buddy never even had time to get breakfaststarted and the fox never even got out of the crate, because the dogs wereright there in the room. Old Moses went right into the crate with the fox,so that both of them went rightright on out through the back end of it. That is,the fox went through, because when Uncle Buddy opened the door to come in,old Moses was still wearing most of the crate around his neck until UncleBuddy kicked it off him. So they made just one run, across the frontgallery and around the house and they could hear the fox's claws whenwhen hewent scrabbling up the lean-pole, onto the roofa fine race while it lasted,butbut the tree was too quick."What in damn's hell do you mean," Uncle Buddy said,"casting that damn thing with the dogs right in the same room?" "Damn thefox," Uncle Buck said. "Go on and start breakfast. It seems to me I've beenaway from home a whole damn month." Let's give Mr. Faulknerand Mr. Faulkner's voice a moment's rest, andand he has told me that he'll be gladto have questions. And so we'll take about a five-minute break, and then have aquestion period.I think Mr. Faulkner willbe very interested to see what questions you might have to ask him, so go rightahead and volunteer.  are you playing akind of fugue on the theme of races here? Are you having a lot of fun withthat? I had a lot of fun with it. I wasn't playing a fugue on the theme ofraces. I was writing about people in what Iwhat to me was amusing terms, and Ihoped it would be amusing terms to the reader. No, it was primarily aboutpeople, about people who had got into a predicament and solved it with theonly tools they had.  this is a little bit off the theme of literature, but I'dlike toif you wouldn't mind tell us a little about your trip to Greece? [I think] I wouldlike to hear a little about that, if that's not getting too far off the subject,too far away from it. It was a strange experience in that that was the only country thatlooked exactly likewe hadI mean, the background, the educationalbackground ofof the Anglo-Saxon had taught him to expect it to look. And sureenough, there was the Hellenic light that I had heard of, had read about. And Isaw Homer's wine-dark sea, too. And there was athe only place I was in wherethere was a sense of a very distant past, but there was nothing inimical in it.In the other parts ofof the Old World there's a sense ofof the past, butthere is somethingsomething [Gothic]Gothic and in a sense a little terrifying. In Greece, the people seem to function against that pastthat for all itsits remoteness in time, it was still inherent inthethe light, the resurgence of spring. You didn't expect to see theghost ofof the old Greeks, or expect to see the actual figures of the gods, butyou had a sense that theythey were near, and they were still powerful, notinimical, justjust powerful. That they themselves hadhad reached and wereenjoying a kind of a nirvana. They existed, but they were free ofof man'sfolly and trouble, of having to involve themselves in man's problem. That theywereat last had the time to watch what man did without having to be involved init. Yes, it was very interesting. I think that two weeks is not onlytoo short, it's an insult to that country, that one should go withwith no limitto his visit. That there's no end to what you can see, and then sure enough, yousee something which is exactly like what you imagined. There will be the plainandand across it, suddenly there is Parnassus with snow on it, and the oldruinsthey look ancient, but there's a sense as though it happened onlyyesterday. That whether Agamemnon ever lived, ever was an actual man or not,there he was, hebecause he had to be. It was necessary. That hehe was in theliterary history of man's spirit, so therefore he must have existed at one timeas a flesh and blood man.  in your new book, The Town, you haveFlem Snopes assuming the mask of respectability. And I was wondering, since you,I think, are going to write a trilogy, thatI was wondering what type ofcharacter would Flem Snopes assume, say, in your next book? He had never heard of respectability. He didn't even know it existed,until suddenlyhe found that he needed it. Andso he assumed it, and as soon as he doesn't need respectability any longer, hewill cast it away. That he had a certain aim which he intended to attain. Hewould use whatever tools necessary, with complete ruthlessness, to gain thatend. And if he had to use respectability, he would use that. If he had to usereligious observance, he would use that. If he has to destroy his wife, he willdo that. If he has to trick aa child, a girl child, into being histool, he will do that with no compunction whatever. That respectability to himwas just a tool.Mr. Faulkner May I ask , to what extent when you're composing your stories, are yourcharacters do they represent ideas or a theme consciously on your part, or towhat extent are they just people who keep developing as characters and let theme and plot fall where they may? Yes, the character comes first as people. I didn't have enough formaleducation to know really what ideas are, that ideas to me must be translatedinto the human being struggling against his own problems. The ideas are onlyincidental or maybe coincidental to writing about people, and the ideas ofthe symbolism, they are simply, in my own case, the tools which thecraftsman uses to tell the story, but his interest is primarily in thecharacters, not in the plot, not really so much in what they do, but it's ininmaking thethe figure of his imagination assume three dimensions and standon its own feet and cast its own shadow. The symbolism, the style, the ideas areonly coincidental to that and are simply the tools which the craftsmanuses.But wouldwould you say then, sir,that you have toyou would begin with an idea for a character rather than ananecdote or an idea? WellOf an event? It could be an anecdote or a scene, but it would be not an idea. Itwould be people in motion, people in some tragic or comic situation strugglingto get out of it, or it could becomethe first conception would be the characteritself.For example, this story you readus this evening, do you recallthis is probably so far back, I wondered, though,what was the germ of that story? Do you recall it, perhaps? The germ of the story was one of the three oldest ideas that mancan write about, which is love, sex. And to me it was comic, of the manthat had got himself involved in an engagement, and he himself couldn'textricate himself, and hishe had to call onhis brother, and his brother used the only tools he had, which was his abilityto play poker.Which to me what was funny. Itwas funny. Also, it wasit had a certain sociological importance in, to show mycountry as it really was in those days. Thethe elegance of the colonialplantation didn't exist in my country. My country was still frontier. Theplantation, thethe columned porticos, that was Charleston and Natchez. Butin my country it was still frontier. People lived from day to day, with awith abluff and crude hardiness, but with a certain simplicity, which to me is veryinteresting because the common picture of the South is all magnolias andcrinoline andand Grecian portals and things like that, which was true onlyaround the fringes of the South, not in the interior, the backwoods.  to what extent have you drawn directly on experience forthese stories? That's difficult to say. The writer, I think, has three reservoirs: oneis experience, which includes what he has read. The other is observation, which,of course, is what he has seen and done. The third is imagination.And hehimself doesn't know, and, in fact, he hasn't gotten time to be concerned or tocare how much of which he draws on at any one time. It's as though he had threereservoirs with three pipes that go to a common tap, with maybe an automaticselector somewhere that whenwhen observation doesn't go far enough, ittries experience. When experience hasn't gone far enough, it reverts toimagination, that the only check is some rigid concept of what is truth and whatis not truth inin the craftsman, which what he does has got to match. If itdoesn't match, he throws it away, and then he's got to go back toimagination. If that is not enough, then he's got to increase his experienceor his observation. But no man can say just how much ofof each he uses. Heknows, any writer, that he is going to change and alter anything he writesbecause any fiction writer is a congenital liar to begin with, you see. He isnot going to take anything as is. He's going to change it. Have you enjoyed your stay here at the University? Yes, sir, very much.We were interested in your comment ofof coming to Virginia because youliked snobs, I wonder if you [might care to]  Well, that wasI thought that we were more or less informal then, and Ididn't really mean that as a serious observation. ButNow, let me define what I mean by a snob, issomeone who is so complete in himself and so satisfied with what he has that heneeds nothing from anybody. That when a stranger comes up, he can accept thatstranger on the stranger's terms provided only the stranger observe only a fewamenities of civilization.And to me that'swhat the people, what Virginians do. They don'tthey never push at me. They wantnothing of me. Theythey willwill offer me their hospitability, and theywillwill accept me. All I have to do is just to behave decently.  Sir, is there any one incident in your life that you just decided thenthat you were going to become a writer? I was living in New Orleans. I was running a power boat for abootlegger. I would go downand take the boatwith aa man with a gun and aaNegro hand for the crew through the industrialcanal across the Mississippi Sound to an island where the schooner wouldbring the raw alcohol up from the Indies, and we would load the cargo and bringit back to town. I'd get a hundred dollars for each trip, and in those days,that was a lot of money, so I wouldn't have to work until I began to run out ofmoney. Then I would make another run with the boat, and I met Sherwood Anderson,and I liked him at once. We would meet and walk around the French Quarter, andhe would talk, and I would listen. We would meet again in the evening. We'd goto some pleasant courtyard, and we'd sit over a bottle of whiskey, and he wouldtalk, and I would listen. In the mornings, he would be in seclusion working.That went on day after day, and I thought if that's all you had to do to be awriter, then that was the life for me,so I[decided I wanted to] become a writer, and I started abook, and right away I found it was fun to do, and I hadn't seen Mr. Anderson inweeks. I met Mrs. Anderson on the street, and she said, "We haven't seen you." Isaid, "Yes'm, I'm writing a book." She said, "Good God."I saw her again a few weeks later. She said, "Itold AndersonSherwood you were writing a book. She says, "Do I want him,Mr. Anderson, to read it?'" I said, "Well'm, he can if hewants to." She said, "Well, he told me to tell you he'll make a trade with you.If he don't have to read that manuscript, he'll tell his publisher to take it."So I said, "done."And I finished themanuscript, and he told his publisher to take it, and that's how I got to be aprofessional writer.But, of course, by thattime, I'd found that writing was fun. It waswas the most fun I'd found yet,and I knew then that I had been bitten and was incurable. I was wondering how long you can writefor how long at a stretch can youwrite before you feel tired, before you've tired yourself out? You get tired, I think, before you realize it. I took a leaf fromfromGentlemen Prefer Blondes when she says, "Always leavehim while you're looking good."Well, Ialways try to remind myself to stop before I'mhave found out I'm tired, but aslong as it's hot, it'sit's difficult to break off andand quit. That takes acertain amount of discipline, to stop and always leave something fresh to starton tomorrow. That's the only rule about writing I have, is never to writecompletely out at one stretch. That could be an hour or sixteen hours in a day,though there're some workmen that have to have a rigid discipline. They sitso many hours a day whether they write anything or not. They do research. Theyhave notebooks, and theythey take a piece of paper andand plot a graph forthe story to follow, which I've never done, because I'm lazy, and I don't likethe effort of putting the words on the paper, so I put that onput that off aslong as possible, and a great deal of that is done here before I start towrite.[Did you have a question?] I have a question I've always wanted to ask an author, is do they reallyput all the significance and meaning and trying to teach this big lesson in thebook, and I had thought that you answered it once, but then you seem tocontradict yourself. Do you write to try to teach somebody a lesson, to describeyour state, or just because you think you've got to write a good story and makesome money off of it? No, no. All that is incidental. What the writer isis doing is tryingto create people. He hasn't got time to bother with the symbols and the message.The first-rate writer hasn't. He is busy creating people, and he would do thateven if he had to pay for the privilege. He's not interested in the money. Themoney is incidental, too, that he is having a good time creating livingpeople.And that's motive enough [to write a book]? Uh, yes, I think so. Actually, he'she's demon-driven. Thethe writerwho is trying to tell a message is not primarily a writer. He ishe's more of anan evangelist or a propagandist [maybe]. Butbut the writer, the true fictioneer isinterested only in creating human beings.Then could I ask you what IkeSnopes is supposed to be inin The Hamlet? What were youcreating then? Is he someone like whomlike someone whom you knew or what?I No, no. No writer is satisfied withwith the folks that God creates.He's convinced that he can do much better than that.To me, Ike Snopes was simply an interesting humanbeing withwith man's natural, normal failings, histhe baseness which manfights against, the honor which he hopes that he can always match. Thehonesty, the courage which he hopes that he can always match. And at times hefails. And then he ishe is pitiable. But he's still human, and he stillbelieves that man can be better than he is, and that is what the writer istrying to do, is interested in, to show man as he is in conflict with hisproblems, with his nature, with his own heart, with his fellows, and with hisenvironment. That's all Iin my opinion, any book or story is about. Of course ithas mutations. The problems fall into the categories of money or sex or death.But the basic story is man in conflict with his own heart, with his fellows,or with his environment.  is there any special reason why you consider Wolfe such agreat author? That was an unfortunate remark I made about twenty years ago that I'vebeen explaining ever since.It was at agroup meeting something like this. Someone asked me how I rated mycontemporaries. I said it's too soon to rate us, we haven't finished yet. Hesaid, "Well, you haven't you any opinion at all about them?" I said, "Aboutwho?" He named Wolfe, Dos Passos, Caldwell, and Hemingway. I said, "Well," andthis was sort of off the cuff. I never thought of it before. I said, "Well, Ithink we all failed, and so I would rate them on the splendor of thefailure." I put Wolfe first because he made thethe most splendid failure. Iput myself second. I put Dos Passos third, Caldwell fourth and Hemingway fifth.It had nothing to do with the value of the work we'd done but on theon thesplendor with which we had failed. I put Hemingway last because he had foundquickly a method in which he was secure, and he didn't need to splash around,to experiment, that he stuck to that, and he didn'tdidn't need to try toput all the history of man's heart onto one pinhead and one paragraph, whichWolfe had tried to do, which is why Wolfe's material would have been unreadablehad it not been for his editor, Mr. Maxwell Perkins at Scribner's, and Mr.Perkins inin a way really wrote Wolfe's book because the mass of incoherentmaterial thatwhich Wolfe sent to him would've been unreadable,if it hadn't been for Mr. Perkins. Sir, you say that your characters are, and as much as possible anyway,just people. And yet I sort of got the idea that Flem Snopes is sort of apractically inhuman character and sort of symbolic himself. Does that everdidthat enter when you wrote that, or Well, it would depend on what he is symbolic of. You see people who areinhuman people. I think that I didn't invent an inhumanthe inhuman type, whichwhich Flem is a manifestation of. I think that Jason Compson in another bookof mine is completely inhuman. But in a way, he is, I hope, a living man. Ihave known people in actual life who were hopeless, who inin the terms ofofofthe humanities, in the terms ofof theof the verities ofof man's condition,compassion and pity and courage, unselfishnesshe was inhuman, but he was stilla living man. He was not created to be a symbol of anything. He was simplycreated because suddenly he had a place inin that particular scene that I waswriting about, in that particular problem of human beings that I was writingabout. Not to symbolize anything at all. Sir, do you believe that the theory of absurdity is applicable to manhimself? I doubt if I understand you. You'll have to explain a little more whatyou mean by that.Well, the theory of absurdity implies that man is completelyunintelligent. Heit's absurd for him to ever  Oh, I see.Putting myself on the [plane] of being or to come incontact with God or anything like that. No, I don't. That would take a different mentality from mine to acceptman as absurd. He is ridiculous at times. He ishe is nothing consistently [absurd],except thesethese exceptions we spoke of, who are inhuman and who arearearedevils, but in general, man is capable ofof absurdity, just as he's capable ofgrandeur, but he is not consistently capable of any. My belief is that he wantsto be consistently capable always ofof the best things ofofof grandeur, ofcourage, of compassion, of honesty, but he fails.Butbut to me he's not absurd.It's only in his ephemeral manifestation of the moment.  I would say as asas an idea, someone with thecapacity to read English that appeared suddenly with no past, mature out of avacuum, would get nothing from reading the books, that he would have to havesomething in his own experience ofof man and man's condition andman's behavior to have made the books comprehensible to him, so, of course, hereads into the books, things the writer didn't put in there, inthe terms that his and the writer's experience could not possiblybe identical. That there are things the writer might think is in that book, whichthe reader doesn't find for the same reason that no twoexperiences can be identical, but everyone reads according to hisownown lights, his own experience, his own observation, imagination,and experience. Most of us here tonight, I think, are rather young men ininthe field of engineering. A lot of us hope to be getting out this year. I wonderif you havethis may be an offbeat questionI wonder if youhave any advice to young men getting ready to go out in the light, you mightsay,from the point of view of someone who'sstudied human beings and people as much as you have. There was a very wise man said to me once, "I never give anybody advicebecause they might take it."And at first Ididn't understand what he meant by that, butbut now I think I do.Actually nobody can bathe for you, you know. You've got to do that yourself, and the experience, theadvice you get, I think, is not by asking for it. Youyou get thatthrough some form of osmosis. You will get it from the books you read, from yourexperiences in college. Every man has got to stand on his own feet, and I thinknow that I wouldn't accept anyone's advice, that I would rather make my ownmistakes than to accept advice whichwhich might save me because Iknow now that mistakes don't hurt you.Well, that's good advice in itself, I think.  Well, thank you.Sir If you were to undertake a biography, what characteristics would youconsider? I wouldn't undertake one for the reason I just stated before, that anywriter worth his salt is convinced he can improve on anything that God evermade.I would never write my own because Iknow, being a congenital liar, I never could tell the truth about[things].  Sir, if you were to write a book based around the University here, whatsort of characters and situations [would you put in it]? Now, that question in a way has been answered before. The writing I havedone has always been from the character. Now, if the character that I thought ofsaid, "I'm going to go to the University of Virginia," then I would have to writeabout the University of Virginia, but the character would have to command that Iwrite about the University of Virginia. It'sit's not ininmy line of work to say, "Now, I'm going to write a story about any place," andthen put people into it, that the people themselves say, "Come on here, Faulkner,we're going to write this one about the University of Virginia."  Isomeone who talked to you gave a list of virtues. I've heardyou mention some of them tonight. Do you have that ready?I think that courage and honesty were among yourlist of virtues. Well, let's use a little better word to me than virtues.They're the verities of the human heart. They are courage, honor, pride,compassion, pity. That they arethey are not virtues. One doesn't tryto practice them, in my opinion, simply because they are good. Onepracticestries to practice them simply because they are the edificeon which the whole history of man has been founded, and by means of whichhisas a race, he has endured this long. Thatwithoutwithout those verities, he would have vanished, just like themastodon and the other ephemeral phenomena of nature which have come and gone inthe history of the world. Man has endured despite his frailty because he acceptsand believes in those verities, that one must be honest not becauseit'sit'sit's virtuous, but because that's the only way toget along. That if people lied constantly to one another, you would never knowwhere you were, you would never know what was going on. That if people didn'tpractice compassion, there would be nothing to [defend] theweak until they got enough strength to stand for themselves. If one didn'tpractice something ofof pride, one would have nothing to be proudabout, to have said, "I did well.I did nothing that Iwas ashamed of. I can lie down with myself and sleep." That is, theyarethey are the verities to be practiced not because they are avirtue but because that's the best way to live in peace with yourself and yourfellows. Sir, what is a roan tooth? Oh, it was aprobably a dead tooth that had turned a bluish color, whichto this little boy was the color of roan horse. That was the first color hethought of, that it was a dead tooth in this lady's mouth here that had a bluishcast or purplish cast to it.Well, let's have one more question [for Mr.Faulkner] and then we'll close down for the night. Yes,ask aquestion. In some of your books, I have noticed the characters tend to be sort ofblanks. You don't know what they are. A good example of this is Sutpen in Absalom, Absalom! He's a blank until the end of the book.You don't know what motivates him. You see him motivated; you see him doingthese things, but you don't see what motivates him. Do you start with knowingwhat the character is and describe his motivations, describe his actions, andthen get around to describing what motivates the actions? No, it is the writer's fault. Before the writer begins to put thatcharacter down, he has got to understand him, and [if] hehasn't made perfectly plain and coherent the motivations necessary to make thatcharacter real to the reader, then the writer himself is at fault.He hasn't, probably, learned enough of his craft by that time.But to thewriter, of course, that character is intact and whole and isbreathing and is standing up, and if to the reader he doesn't stand up and isnot real and actual, then that is the fault of the craftsman.I didn't sayhe's real and actual, and I realize this, but Idon't see the reasons for his actions until theuntil the very end ofthe book. I just didn't see why he did these things. I see that he did them, andI knew there was a reason for it, but I didn't know what it was. Well, you can meet an actual living creature or man, you can see him inthe throes of some action, and it won't be until after the action is completethat you'll find out why he did that. You agree to that, that that'spossible?Yeah. Well, that's the case of Sutpen. It'ssimply was a matter ofofof where youhappened to be standing, where the reader happened to be standing, that hedidn'tthe observer happened to be standing, that he didn't see themotives in time. Now, that can be used as as a trickto be more effective. I don't remember if that was my intent then,but that is a valid trick whichwhich applies one of thesimple primary rules ofof writing any paragraph, which isemphasis. I was wondering, you said that in your list of the five authors, youthought you had all failed, and I wondered just what it was you thought you hadfailed at and what you thought, if there is such a thing, as[success]? Oh, itI mean by it this, that what saves any artist, anywriter, is that he will never quite attain the image, the shape, the dream. It'salways out of his reach. If he ever attained it, then he would be miserable forthe rest of his life, but he never quite matches that, so he writes again andagain and again, and that'sthat's why the artist's lifeis such a happy one. He never does reach satiety. He neverwill. He will believe that next time, he will write the thing that will matchthat marvelous dream that he has, butbut he knows hewon't. But he will still try. There's always some reason for him to wake uptomorrow morning. There's something to do. That's why he's the happiest man ofall of them.And do you think that each new book is better than the old one? Well, to me, there're no degrees. It's either good orit'sit's bad,andit's got to be perfect, then I'll say it's good.But there are not degrees of it.The only consistent opinion I have is that it's another failure, neither goodnor bad.It justit just [a failure]. But never a shameful failure.It'sit's when the book was basely conceived andexecuted it failed. That's the shameful failure. That is something to writheover, but just a decent, honest failure is all right because, as Ijust said, failure and mistakes never hurt you. Nothing to dread orfear oror dodge is an opportunity in which you might make a mistake.[There's] nothing to be ashamed of in that, nothing to hurtyou.Well, ladies and gentleman, thank you for your interesting andintelligent questions.Thank you, Mr.Faulkner. No, I don't because I'mI'm notvery literary and don't keep up with things like that. Somebody saidthat southerners don't read books, they write books. Maybe that's allit is, but I can't say unless it may be that until the last war,southerners never got away from home. Their only chance to adventure wasin the imagination. Their only chance forfor change, for an experiencethat was romantic andand interesting was to invent it and put it down onpaper. I'm not too certain that I believe that very much myself, but that'sthe sort of thing . Not necessarily. I think that Scott was read more in the Southfor the reason that at a time the southerner had very little of his money todevote to the buying of books, and there was a kinship perhaps betweenthe life ofofofof Scott's Highland and the life thesoutherner led after Reconstruction. They too werewere in the aftermath ofaof a land which had been conquered and devastated by peoplepeople speakingits own language, which hasn't happened too many times. And so everysouthern household, when they bought books, theythey bought Scott. I reckonit was because you got more words for your money, maybe, could have hadsomething to do with that.But everyhousehold that allthat at all pretended to be literate had Scott.That's true. I don't know. It seems to methat very few southerners were a part of that group of expatriates ofthe Twenties in Paris. Most of the ones I knew werewere northerners. Idon't remember a single southerner that had any part in it. I would say thatthe reasons for the renaissance in southern writing was in the cards, inthe making, long before that. I think this may have had a little to do withit: since the Civil War, there has been a great deal ofmisunderstandingis not quite the right word, the northerner, the outlander, had a queerand erroneous idea ofof what southern people were. It may be that that wasan instinctive desire in southerners to tell the outlander just whatwe were, just what we might have had that we felt was worthaccepting four years of war, in which we knew we had no chance to win it, tosay this is what we had that we thought was worth that, or this is what weactually are. I don't know. Thatthat's probably valid. I imagine thereare so many things that went into it that probably nobody could say, "This iswhere the resurgence of writing in the South came from." I myself am inclinedto think it was because of thethe barrenness of the southerner's life,that he had to resort to his own imagination to create his ownCarcassonne.In that connection would you mind commenting on thisquestion? Youyou said a minute ago, facetiously, that southerners don'tread books, they write them. It has long been known, of course, to literaryhistorians that southern writers both before and after the Civil War countedpretty largely on northern readers. And Hayne, for example, was a notableexample. Lanier is another example. Do you suppose that has been in theconsciousness of the average southern writer and could possibly haveinfluenced his work in any way? Yes, it has. It's in hisconsciousness that the man that will publish his book is a northerner, andhehe is never unaware of that, that the publisher andand, to an extent,his readers are northerners. I think that most southerners know that hishome folks ain't going to like what he writes anyway, that he's not reallywriting to them, and thatand that they simply do not read books. They aregood people, but they just do not read books.The clash, , betweenthe explanations of the South, does that help square the fact that theexplanations offered are not always greeted with warmth in theSouthitself? Can I have your specific question again? I got two or threedifferent ideas there.What I meant was that if part of the renascence in southernwriters is due to an urge to explain the southernthe South to explainitself, is it not also true that once one gets out of the moonlight andmagnolias school, that various of the non-writing southerners do not likewhat the writing southerners do or the picture they present? Yes, that's quite true. Thethenon-writing southerner, the non-reading southerner, he wants the sort ofbrochure that the Chamber of Commerce gets out.There are things in his country that he's nottoo proud of himself, butbut to him it's bad manners to show that inpublic. Thean element of the locality, but didn't the people of his owncountry have a sort of a fierce pride in people like Thoreau andEmerson? Or was that just the educated intellectual New Englander thatfelt that? Well, I always thought that everybody, they might not haveapproved so much of all that Emerson or Thoreau said, but they hadaa fierce, almost provincial pride inYou'd have to go to Hawthorne, wouldn't you, to find Would that have held true of Hawthorne? Anyway, [as far as that's concerned,] as far asI know, he was just as popular at home as he was anywhere else. Well, that gets back tosomething else. Can a man write about ideas except inin the provincialterms of his background? Could Emerson have written Emersonwould it have been the sameEmerson if he'd been a Mississippian, say, or a Texan or a Californian? But would a Californian in aclimate that don't change, where you don't needeven a warm house to live inwhat would hecare about self-reliance?  Well, I would say thatCarlyle's and Whitman's definition of a big man were completely different.Carlyle's an islandera small country. His idea of a big man is ais abig individual man. I should think that Whitman's idea of a big man is onethat is lucky enough to belong to a race of giants, that he's one too. Iwonder if Whitman believed that he was a bigger man than anybody else inAmerica. It would have to, just like the language the man knows to write inwould have some influence on him. But I don't think that thethat thetopographyone topography will produce a writer where another topographywon't. But of course No, sir,becausebecause the lack ofthe lack of roadsin Yoknapatawpha County ain't near as complex asas Madison Avenue or 42ndStreet. Though, of course, that depends upon who is looking at each one.Yoknapatawpha County ain't near as complex as the Empire State Building. Well, a man's future isinherent in that man. Iin the sense that life, A.D. 1957, is notthe end of life, that there'll be a 2057. That we assume that. There maynot be, but we assume that. And in man, in man's behavior today is 19502057. If we just had a machine that could project ahead and could capturethat, that machine couldcould isolate andand freeze a picture, an image,of what man will be doing in 2057, just asas the machine might capture andfix the light rays showing what he was doing inin B.C. 28. That is, that'sthe mystical belief that there is no such thing as "was." Thatthattime "is," and if there's no such thing as "was," then there is no suchthing as "will be." That time is ais anot a fixed condition, that timeis, in a wayin a way, the sum of the combined intelligences of all men whobreathe at that moment. No Well, I can assume thefact that in the people which I create is the genesis, the seedof 2057. I don't know it, and I don't think I need to know it. But thepeople behave according to thethe pattern by which man has been able toendure this long. Then, if he holds to that pattern, he will continue toendure, assuming that there's not somesome tremendous cataclysmic explosionwhich will wreck everything. That the verities which are true now willbe true in 2057, and man willwill go through the same struggle to liveup to them, to behave as hehe wants to behave, whether he can or not,whether he fails or not. That his problems really won't be any different.The important problems won't be any different in 2057 than they are now. Oh, I see what you mean. Well, of course the writer arrogates tohimself that right, to know the future of his own people. He don't know thefuture of the human race, but he does know the future ofofof thatindividual, that character, or he never could get his book done. That is, hehas got to know where the thing's going, in a way, before he starts becausethen he won't know when to stop it. Yes, yes. Yes, yes. I think so. I think if we could knowthe future of ourselves and one another we would never be as baffled andconfused byby people, by our contact with people, as we are. It wouldn't beas much fun, of course, but let me figure a wayto phrase it and get it clear in my mind [in so long. I don't know]Well, whatwhat do you think isthewas the difference in quality of the impact on theto the southernpeople after the Civil War and theas a mental experience and thoughand sayWorld War Ithe people that were involved in World War I? I would say possibly itwas sharper, a harder experience, because forforyears the southerner had lived a safe and isolated life in which nothingactually had happened to him, except the simple things ofof cropfailures andand trouble withwith his own particular plantation economy. The Civil War was a great deal of ashock to him because suddenly it thrust him into the world. He had to becomea member, not of a class or of a provincial segment, but a member of thewhole human race. When he got into the second World War he had gotten used tohaving to be a member of the human race, whether he wanted to or not, and sothat wasn't as much shock. Also, if anybody did, he won that war. That is,he was on the side that was succesful. In the Civil War, the southerner wason the side that lost.I suppose my question inreference to Dostoevsky boils down to this. Why do you consider Benjy a goodtool in the telling of this story, one of the instruments in tellingthe story? The same question, why do you often use children who are quiteyoung and not much of athe one inVardaman. Is itpossibly because the idiot and the child are free of any preconceived ideas about the truth? They have no convention. They haven't had any religion[to fog them] or anything like that. They're sort ofopen-minded and free. And are they better judges of the truth? Can they seethe truth better than the more sophisticated and more intelligenthuman beings? Only in this sense: say therewas a mirror which would obliterate everything from the image it reflectedexceptexcept the verities. To me, that is the child. As you say, it has lesstrash that itit has had to assimilate and live with in order to copewith the adult world. Itit sees with anot a clearer eye, that's not theword I wantbut itit is incapable of seeing the things which arewhich arenot true, which don't match the verities, which the adult has been trainedand had to learn, so that he no longer knows that hewhat he sees isobfuscated. The child don't even know that it doesn't see something that theadult sees. And what the child sees is closer to the verities, the importantthings. I think that'sthe most interesting thing to write about is thechild as it learns to cope with the adult world which it didn't create, thatit's got to learn to live with in order to endure, to get along, tohave enough to eat, and how it makes those adjustments, how it graduallycomes to believe thatthat lies are truths. Itit don't know that it iscoming to believe that. It just has to learn that or die. And when it'sstill a child, it doesn't know yet. It hasn't had to believe that lies aretruth. To the child the lie is still a lie, and the truth is truth. Benjy,the idiothe was a sublimated idiot, probably, but he had some of thatquality. He had the child's quality to see and recognize only the truth,but he had a man's long years ofof simple experience, whether he couldassimilate that experience or not. He had a longer time to see that morehuman beings were capable of believing that lies were true, than thechild of three or four or five or six. Well, that savagery, thatruthless[ness], that's one of the verities. It's not avirtue, but itit's a verity. To me, there'sthere's a distinction betweenverity and virtue. Some of the verities, when they are practiced, thepractice of them becomes virtue. The child is incapable of being[clubbed] up by your shibboleth, "you musn't do thisbecause it's wrong." The child says, "I will do this because I want to," andhe tries to do it. That inthatthat's a truth inin the world, too,that man can be inhuman to man. It's a verity. It'sit's a vice whenpracticed, but it's one of the verities. Just likelike honor andhonesty. That'swas simply awell, Idon't like the word "trick," but it was used deliberately to look atatthe object from three points of view. Just as when youyou examine amonument you will walk around it. You are not satisfied to look at it fromjust one side. Also, itto look at it fromfrom three differentmentalities. That wasone was the mirror which obliterated all except truthbecause the mirror didn't know the other factors existed. Another was tolook at it from the point of view ofof someone who had made of himself amore or less artificial man through his desire to practice what he had beentold was a virtue, apart from his belief in virtues, what he had been told,trained by his respect for education in the old classical sense. The otherwas from the point of view of a man whowho practiced virtue from simpleinstinct, fromfromwell, more than that, becausefor a practical reason,because it was better. There was less confusion if all people didn't telllies to one another and didn't pretend. That seemed to me to give a morecomplete picture of the specific incidents as they occurred if they couldbe [expressed] three times. Well, he changed. He grew upin that book. And, of course, his point of view changed. Well, he had got out of hisdepthdepth. He had got into the real world. While he wascould bea countyattorney, an amateur Sherlock Holmes, then he was at home, butbut he gotout of that. He got into a real world in which people anguished andsuffered, not simply did things which they shouldn't do. And he wasn't asprepared to cope with people who were following their own bent, not forprofit but simply because they had to. That is, he knew a good deal lessabout people than he knew about the law and about the weighing of evidenceandand drawing the right conclusions from what hehe saw with his legalmind. When hewhen he had to deal with people, he was an amateur. He wasattimes he had a good deal less judgment than his nephew did. Which is notagainst education, as probably the passion he had for getting degrees, fortrying this and trying that and going all the way to Europe to get moredegrees, to study more, was in his own nature. It was the same characterthat made him shy away from marriage. He was probably afraid to be married.He might get too involved with the human race if he married one of them.Did you mean Gavin Stevens to belike that in Intruder in the Dust? No'm. These people I invent, and after that I just run along andput down what they say and do. I don't know always what they are going todevelop into myself.I mean, is Gavin at the same stage of development in Intruder in the Dust? Is he younger in The Town? Intruder inthe Dust happened after The Town. Intruder in the Dust happened about 1935 or '40, andThe Town began inin 1909 and went to 1927.Probably Stevens learned something from The Town tocarry into Intruder in the Dust. the fight thatGavin has with de Spain in The Town reminded me insome ways of the fight that Quentin had when he was in Cambridge. They bothseemed a little bit like Don Quixote Yes.fighting for the honor of a lady. Is there any such similaritythere, in character, between the two men at that time? No, that'sthat's a constant, sadandand funny picture too. It is the knight that goes out to defend somebodywho don't want to be defended and don't need it. But it's a very finequality inin human nature. I hope it will always endure. It is comical and alittle sad, and Quentin and Stevens were that much alike. what did you startwith in Intruder in the Dust? Was it the idea of asingle character or ? Well, it began with thenotionthere was a tremendous flux of detective stories going about at thattime, and my children were always buying them and bringing them home. I'dstumble over them everywhere I went. And I thought of an idea for one wouldbe a man in jail, just about to be hung, that would have to be his owndetective. He couldn't get anybody to help him. Then the next thought was,the man for that would be a Negro. Then the character ofof LucasLucasBeauchamp came along. And the book came out of that. It was the notion of aman in jail who couldn't hire a detective, couldn't hire one of these toughguys that slapped women aroundand took adrink every time he couldn't think of what to say next.But once I thought of Beauchamp, then he tookcharge of the story, and the story was a good deal different from the ideathatof the detective story that I had started with.Sir, speaking of technique andthe way characters are handled, somebody's accused you of going to school toJoyce. Would you mind commenting on his and perhaps any other individualinfluences on you? I don't believe that anyanywriter has time to go to school to any one man. He learnlearns fromeverything he reads. He steals from any source that's available. He has nomorals whatever. But heI don't think he ever sets out to say, "Now I'mgoing to write like Joyce" or write like anybody else, that he's too busywriting about people. He remembers everything he reads without having tomemorize. He ishe is voracious and amoral. He stores away everything,telephone directories, up and down. Congressional record, I used to readthat. And the time comes when he needs something, and sure enough, there itis. He don't remember where he got it and don't care, because he is perfectlywilling for anyone after him to take anything from his work, at least I am.I'm quite sure that everything I ever read has influenced me. No, I don't. I've said this before. That's one good thing about writing. When youwrite a book you don't ever have to read it again, because you're busy onanother one. And I think the writer never goes back to see where he got whatfrom. I'm sure he could find plenty of sources, but hehe don't do it becausehe's busy with another one then. I imagine if I went back over the work I could find similarities. Ican find similarities between Conrad and Hardy. And I'm sure I can findConrad in my stuff and find almost anybody else you could name. I'm inclined to think that allwriters do that, only most of them, except Conrad and me, may be a littlemore clever about it. Probably Conrad was because he deliberately taughthimself a foreign language to write in. And mine may be because Inevernever went to school enough to save myself the shortcuts of learningEnglish. That we both are a little more obvious than the others for thatreason.Sir, some months ago youexpressed a fear in the loss of frontiers in American writing. Do you seeany new frontiers opening up? Well, not exactly a frontier.I think now that we are faced with more of aof a threat. It could hardly bea frontier to be conquered. It'sit's a force to be resisted, the force thatis the pressure to make everybody belong to a mass or a group, which, in myopinion, would be the death of the writing and the painting and the musicand everything else, that man has got to resist that. It's difficult toresist because, to a certain extent, he has got to compromise now, simply inorder to get along. It's theyou've got to be on the alertconstantly to know just exactly where to draw the line, which is too badfor the artist who should have all his time free to fight simpler dragonsthan that. No, that would belong to the same belief that itI have never quitedone it yet, that it fails in all respects.That it hasn'thasn't shown thefuture.It hasn't been a good enough picture of the past. It's not agood enough picture ofof now, "is," to please me. I can't say because I haven't quite got up to 1957 yet. It'sthat'san interesting thought, and I'll be curious to know if I do begin to runinto trouble then. So far I haven't got up to that yet. Oh yes, yes. Now that comes back to amore or less idle remark I made years ago. I have no particular greatadmiration for Wolfe. This is what happened in that. It was at a group yearsago. Somebody asked what I thought about my contemporaries. I said, "We'renot done writing yet, I couldn't say." And he said, "Well, haven't you gotany opinion at all about them?" I said, "About who?" He named Wolfe, DosPassos, Erskine Caldwell, Hemingway and me. I said, "Well, I willI wouldrate us this way," which I did, and that's what that came from, and forabout twenty years now I've been trying to explain that.  I don't know because I haven'tread much of Wolfe. I have just glancedglanced into it. I think I've readone of his short stories, but none of the books have I ever finished. I haveopened them and read a little here and a little there, but I never havefinished one, so I just don't know. I would rather have as few facts as possible because Iin myopinion, the writer is writing about truth, andand I think truth and factshave almost no relation to one another. They ain't very closely connected.And I would rather have as few facts as possible, and let observation andexperience and imagination [do the rest of it]. I don't know, if you as immune to facts as I am, it don'tmatter.  in view of thefact that those people asked you for ratings when thewhen the horse racehad gotten maybe to the first quarter mark, and we're now perhaps halfwayaround the course, would you feel inclined to make any revision in the orderthat you saw at that time? No, because I made my estimateon the gallantry of the failure, not on theon theon the success ortheor the validity ofof the work. It's on the gallantry of the effort whichfailed. In my opinion, my work has all failed. Itit ain't quite goodenough, which is the only reason to write another one, because writing reallyain't any fun. I mean the mechanics of putting the stuff down on paper is nofun. I can think of too many other things I'd rather do. And I don't seeany reason to change that, no. After we have all written out, and if there'stime to look back at it, then I couldcould make a private estimate ofthe work. But right now, I think it's too soon. Of course, Wolfe isfinished because he's dead, but the others are not. Caldwell seems to havewritten himself out years ago, which has nothing to do with the valueofofof the first books, and I think that the first books, God's Little Acre and the short stories, that'senough for any man. He should be content with that, butbut knowing writers,I know he's not, just as I'm not content with mine. I meant only thatHemingway had sense enough to find a method which he could control anddidn't need oror didn't have to, wasn't driven by his private demon towaste himself in trying to dodo more than that. So, he has doneconsistently probably the most solid work of all of us. But it wasn'tthethe splendid, magnificent bust that Wolfe made in trying to put thewhole history of the human heart on the head of a pin, you might say. No, because I don't have muchpatience with facts, and any writer is a congenital liar to begin with,or he wouldn't take up writing, and so I couldn't tell the truth even abouthistory.That's why I'll never write abiography. I couldn't tell the truth about Faulkner, I'm sure about it . Any writer tries to improve on what hesees. In his opinion, the Lord ain't near as good as he is at creating people. you said thatHemingway developed a method he could control. What do you thinkwhat isyour personal opinion of Across the River and into theTrees? I would say it wasthat he considered it a bad book. Just like heconsiders To Have and Have Not a bad book, probably.But then the man that wrote some of the stories in Men Without Women and some of the early bookshe can afford towrite a bad book, whenever he wants to, I think. Miss Hale will agree withthat, won't you?Do you still read any of thebooks that come out today, [like the books by Herman Wouk and writers like him]? No, I don't. I think that mostwriters, as they get old, read less and less. The books that I read now are theones I read and liked when I was twenty-one years old. I haven't read a newbook, unless it was specifically put in my hand, in, oh, fifteen years.There have been exceptions, of course, that I have read for some particularreason, like that someone asked me to look at it, or I picked it up bychance and read a page and found I liked it,but I don't keep up withmodern books anymore. When I was young I read everything, but notanymore. All of Balzac, Don Quixote, Madame Bovary,Salammbo, The Temptation of Saint Anthony, TurgenevI wonder whatbecame of him. He's not even writing any more. Is he dead? Does anybodyknow? Dostoevsky, Tolstoy, most ofDickens, the Old Testament, ShakespeareI don't read as much poetry as I didonce.Some of Conrad. I reckon there's maybe fifty books that everyfive years I will read through again, some for the story, some for acharacter. One of my favorite people is Mrs. Gamp.I get her out every winterand read about her again. The Nigger of the Narcissus. Haven't read that in years. Not in years. "Falk.""The End of the Tether." What's the one aboutthe young man that was given command of theLord Jim. barque in? Bangkok?"Youth." "Youth." It's a question of thewriter's confidence. I think that what every writer wanted to be is apoet. He failed, and so the next is the short story. He failed, and so allthat remains is tois to write the novel. The poet can take theinstance, the [single] instant of man's anguish, intofour lines or fourteen lines. The short story writer can't do that, but hecan do it in a thousand words. The novelist can't do either, and it takeshim a hundred thousand words to do.Sir, youyou seemed from that toplace a premium on conciseness, yet your most brilliant successes seem tohave been in the other direction. Conciseness is the wrong word.It's ait's a distillation. Down to theto theto perfection. You'vegot to use the clumsy language to communicate. It's a distillation ofofthe anguish to its essence, which the poet can do. The short storywriter is not that good. He has got to take a little more space, a littlemore of the clumsy, mean tools of communication. The novelist has got totake still more. But any story can be told in one sentence. If it can't betold in one sentence, you'd better throw it away and think of one that canbe. Of course, the ramifications devolve from thatout of that, but thestory itself, the moment of anguish or triumph, can be distilled into onesentence, and the poet does it inin the most moving and most memorableway. He has touched it withwith a magic as though that anguish, or thattriumph, had never occurred before. Yes.Nobody can escape that,of course. But I think any writer that brings you a manuscript to read,you can save time by not reading that one, because the ones that write thegood ones haven't got time to bring it to you and say, "Read this." They don'tcare whether you read it or not or whether you like it or not. They're thegood ones.Yes, indeed.Some of the booksYou've doneyou've done wellto hush up these people. They'reso full of information. They don't need anything fromme.  I hadn't noticed it.Just like The Nigger of theNarcissus is very short. I probably hadn't noticed that mucheither.Well, you have mentioned some ofthe novels that you like most. Is there any particular poetry that youthink came closest to saying the truth in a few words? Almost all of it. Burns,Keats, Wordsworth, now and then Whitman, Ben Johnson, Marlowealmost all ofit.Laforgue.Goethe.Almost all of it. That's why people still read it, whythe names are still known. Well, few are good ones. Idon't think that difficulty is the word. It'sit's a combination ofofofa demon andandand a fire that you have. Difficult or ease has nothing todo with it. II wish I did know exactly what it is that it takes to make apoet. I think that any writer is better off if he looks on himself as apoet. He's a failed poet. I agree with you. But to look on himself primarilyas a poet. That he hashas found man's history in itsits mutations, inthethe instances in which itit becomes apparent, his anguish, histriumph, his failures, the whole passion ofof breathing, is so strong andso urgent that itit must be recorded. And if he is very fortunate, hecancan do it as the poets did it, and if he's a little less fortunate, hecan do it as the short story writers do it, as Chekhov did it. If he isleast fortunate, he's got to go back to the clumsy method ofof Mark Twainand Dreiser.Yes we are. Well, thank you. I think that nobody can say, "I'm going to use stream-of-consciousness as my method for writing." That'sthat's wrong. He'd getinto trouble. He must use that simply as a tool, only when nothing else will dothe work. It's much better to show the character in familiar termsofof action, of speech, but sometimes that's not sufficient. Then youhave to use another tool, just as at times the carpenter realizes that hisfamiliar tool is not quite enough to do what he wants to do, so he's got to stopand make something, make a tool [to use].Mr. Faulkner The New York Times spoke of yourbrooding concern for people. Thiswere you born with that broodingconcern for the human being or was that a[vision]adulthood approaches, or when did thisbrooding concernhappen? Now, I think that's a question you should ask the man who wrote thepiece in the New York Times.I don't think I have any brooding concerns forpeople. I like people. There's no brooding concern about it.You don'tyou don't feel that you have a brooding concern? I didn't know I had until this man told me,but I think people arearesomething that one doesn't need to brood about. People are interesting. They arethe most interesting, diverting thing on earth.It'sit's fun to watch people and wonder why they dowhat they do, not to brood over them. Of course, one has got to be concernedover man's condition because if man is to advance, he must takecognizance of man's condition to improve it, but you don't brood over it. You dosomething about it. When you see injustice, you raise your voiceandand state that "This isthis is bad, I don't like it," butyou don't brood over it. Sir, why is it that most of your short stories and hunting stories are soclear and simple like the one you just read, yetyet some of yournovels that you think are your finest, are, you know, [have] tobe so mixed up psychologically in that they're hard for the average reader tounderstand? Well, that is something like the first question we had. The storycommands its own method of telling it. Some stories can be told quite simply andobjectively, like this little boy's reactions to the adult world that he had tocope with. Other stories demand more probing into what makes men and women tick.That is, this little boy could showcould show what made him tick byhis simple speech and actions. There are other times when the action and thespeech won't show that, so the craftsman's got to dig around to find some othermethod to use to show what he hopes to tell. And it's notthat the ones I like are the ones in which I've donethein which I'm obscure. They're they're the ones thathave caused me the most trouble. I think none of the books that any writer doesare quite good enough. That's why he writes another one. The ones that he laborsthe hardest over or worries the most about, he develops thisthe sameaffection for that the parent does for thefor theunfortunate child, the sick child, or the mentally unbalancedchild, but theythey all are failures in his opinion because they'renot as good. He don't want to be as good as his coevals or evenjust as good as Shakespeare. He wants to be better than Shakespeare and Homer.He knows he can't, but that'sthat's what he works for. That's whatmakes a writer's life such a happy one. He always has something toget up tomorrow that he's anxious to do, which is to attain theimpossible, never to reach satiety, always to havesomething a little beyond his reach but still to jump at it, to try for it. I was speaking to somebody and they mentioned thefact that one of the [Adams], or I don't know who, as a youngboy of nine seemed to have the future weight of the world on hisshouldershoulders. As a young child, did you show this great geniusor future genius?Did you write or did yourmother and father know that you were going to be a great writer some day? Whatindications were there that you were?  Well, I suspect that to any mother, the child is a geniusno matter what he does, [and I suspect] that to any father [a boy]that showed no inclination to be anything but a trampis not much of anything to him and never will be, but I think thatprobably the writer is being a writer from the time he begins toobserve long before he learns to spell. It'ssometimes a man or womanbegins to write at an early age. Sometimes they wait until middle age or evenlate in life.Well, did you write very early? Yes, but not seriously. I never thought of taking up writing asa serious trade until I met Mr. Sherwood Anderson in NewOrleans, and I liked him at once. We would meet in the afternoon. Ihad ahad other jobs then, but I would be [off at]times, and we would walk down [in] New Orleans, and he wouldtalk, and I would listen. We would meet in the evening and go to acourtyard, andand he would talk, and I would listen until twelve orone o'clock over a bottle of whiskey. The next morning he would be in seclusionworking. I wouldn't see him until afternoon, and then we would walk, and I wouldlisten, and he would talk, and we would talk and laugh again in the evening, andthe next morning he'd still bewriting. And I thought that if that's thesort of life being a writer was then that's the life for me,that I would become a writer. And so I startedwriting a book and after the first page or two, I found it was fun, and I was atit every day, and I hadn't seen Mr. Anderson in three or four weeks, and I metMrs. Anderson on the street one day. She said, "We haven't seen you in a longtime. What's wrong? Are you mad at us?" I said, "No, ma'am, I'm writing a book." And she said, "Good Lord."I saw her later, and she said, "I told Sherwoodyou were writing a book. He said, 'Do you want him to read it?'" I hadn'tthought of anybody reading it. I said, "Well'm, if he wants to, he can." She said,"Well, he told me he would make a trade with you. If he don't have to read thatmanuscript, he'll tell his publisher to take it." I said, "Done."And so he told his publisher to take it. That'show I became a writer.Which book was that, Mr. Faulkner? That was one called Soldier's Pay, the first one.That was back in 1922, I believe. to what extent can a professional writer call his ownshots? Do you feel that the publisher [senses] what yourpublic expects you to write [and puts]the pressure on you to write a certain way? In my case, there's never been any pressure. Nevernever beenany pressure at all. I have written manuscripts whichwhich beforethey werewere done, I myself decided were not good enough, and Iburned them up. There have been other manuscripts which I would send to thepublisher, and he'd say for a certain reason, "We can't print this," so I wouldkeep it until times changed, and then he'd say, "We can print them now [orsomething like that]," but there're never been any pressure on me.I've either had the best publishers or maybe some providence watchedover me and kept me fromfrom getting into trouble, but there's neverbeen any pressure on me, and I think that is what makesthe fiction writer, the poet's life, the best one because he ishis own man or woman. Nobody tells him what to do or say. If you're a dramatist,then you've got to compromise with actors and directors and with the public orwhoever's puts up the money for it.the writer is probablythe only person alive who can be completely individual, to doexactly as he wants to do.Mr. Faulkner I saw something not long ago that took The Sound andthe Fury[in the] four sections and tried to draw a parallel between the idand ego and super-ego and the author [as a] person. Don't youthink that is indicative of what a lot of critics and scholars are doing with[not only] you but with contemporary writers, making psychological inferences andfinding symbols that the author never intended? Well, I would say that the author didn't deliberately intend, but Ithink that in the same culture, the backgroundofofof the critic and of the writer are so similar that apart ofof each one's history is the seed, which can betranslated into the symbols which are standardized within that culture. Thatis, the writer don't have to know Freud to have written thingswhich anyone who does know Freud can divine and reduce intosymbols. And so when the critic finds those symbols, they are, of course, there.But they were there asasas inevitably as the criticshouldshould stumble on his own knowledge of Freud to discern thesymbol. But I think the writer is primarily concerned in telling about people,in the only terms he knows, which is out of his experience, his observation, andhis imagination. And the experience and the imagination and the observation of aculture areare all the people in that culture partake of it, of thesame three things, more or less. Thethe critic has avalid part in any culture. I think that it'sit might be a good thingif most writers were like me and didn't bother to read him. That is, the writerknows what is in his book, and he knows whether itit failed or didn'tfail. Theand so it's possible that reading thecriticisms could do a young writer harm because it could confuse him.It couldbeget him to think in terms of the symbolism which the critic, who is usually agood deal more erudite than the writer, can find in his work. what was your reaction to the Greek production of Requiem for a Nun? I didn't get to see it. It was a gala night, and there wasso much running back and forth. That was the daythat Makarios was freed by the British, which was the first daythat the British Ambassador could come out on the streets of Athens at night,and so there was a good deal of a celebration, so much of being hauled aroundfrom one ambassadorial box to another, then having to go backstage,andand so I didn't get a chance to see the play. I just saw scrapsand fragments of it. Mr. Faulkner How do pronounce that county of yours correctly?  If you break it down into syllables, it'sit's not toodifficult. YAK-NA-PA-TAW-PHA, Yoknapatawpha.It's a Chickasaw word meaning water runs slowthrough the flatland. Water flows through slow through the flatland. in line with the question about the sometimesincomprehensibility of the novels to the average reader, I will confess it tooka little more than three years to read The Sound and theFury, not only because at first I found it difficult to understand, butbecause later, as I did begin to understand it, I found it very strong stuff,really stronger than I couldcould take all at once, and I wondered how long it tookyou to write [this]. It didn't take too long to write it. It started out as a short story andthen grew. Thethe obscurity in a writer's work is theisthe writer's fault. It comes from a valivery valid reason to him.It's the sense, the foreknowledge of death which everyone has. The writerhashas been stricken with the passion and beauty oflife, the world, and a demon-driven need to expressthat, to put it down on paper or cut it into marble or into music, and with thatforeknowledge that he has only a limited time to do it, he may be dead tomorrowhe's got to do it all while he can still breathe, and it's a desire,a need, to put the whole history of the human heart into any and every word,every paragraph that he writes, and the obscurity comes from a belief which Ihold, that there is no such thing as "was."That is that every manat any moment in any action of his life is the sum of his whole past, andto show that man in a book or story intact and whole, the long thread of his past has got to be implied orinferred or suggested, and I haven't yet found any simple method to do that. Theobscurity is not deliberate. I hate that obscurity as much as any reader, but Ihaven't found a better way yet to do it.[I bet it was a] rewarding experience to keep at it. Iwondered, too, as I've noticed evidences ofof characters ofin variousworks of yours of mental instability of one kind or another. For instance, theidiot in The Sound and the Fury, and then I rememberaan old woman who kept the body of her murdered lover for years andyears andmaybe that was one of your short stories. Yes.I wondered whether this comes from study of mental instability orobservation or is it imagination.For instance, an idiot? How can people knowhow these mental processes work? One can't, of course. That to the writer is a part of thetragic yet immortal human condition. Of course, there're not as many idiots inMississippi as in mymy books probably,butbut there are some, andand since thereare some, that is a fact, a verity in the tragic andandbeautiful human condition, though thethe novelist isnot trying to preach or deliver a message. Hehe isshowing to anyone that will take the trouble to read that thereis pity, there is injustice, there are things in man's condition which should bechanged, should be rectified, and if not that, should bebe looked onwith pity and compassion, which iswhich is a part of beauty, too, thecapacity tofor compassion, for pity is to me just assplendid as the capacity to be brave, heroic. Andthethe capacity, the failure,whichwhich is baseness and sin areareare justashave just as much need for compassion asthethe mentality which is bad, that if one isto change man's condition, mustone must believeinin the verities ofof not only basenessbutand bravery, but of compassion, too, never to judge.Does it give the author as much pain as it does the reader to producescenes such as when Caddy wanted to see her baby and Jason just drove by? Yes, it does, but that'sthe writer is notsimply dragging that in toto pull a few tears, heishe puts that down as an instance of man's injustice to man. Thatman will always be unjust to man, yet there must always bebe people,men and women who are capable of the compassion toward that injustice and thehatred of that injustice, and the will to risk public opprobrium, to stand upand say, "This is rotten, this stinks, I won't have it."Do you think anyone really wants to be pitied, though? No, nobody does. Because nobody believe that he deserves pity. how do you feel about [the Negro in theSouth]? About what?About the Negro in the South? Well, that's athat's a big question. Could you be a littlespecific?Well, no.  The Negro is a part of our economy and ouroursouthern traditions. It's true anywhere, Virginia, Mississippi, or Texas.Thethe southernsouthernthe whitesoutherner loves Negroes as individual Negroes, andbuthehe don't like Negroes in the mass, as apart from the northerner whoin theory loves the Negroes in the mass but he's terrified and frightened ofindividual Negroes.I think that isathe condition of the Negro in the South has got to bechanged for the simple reason, two simple reasons. One is thathe'sthere's seventeen million of him now. He is diffuse over thecountry to where he can be a political factor anywhere.And also, if we are tocope withwith a culture which says that manis of no importance as measured and matched against the state, ifwe're to cope with that and be successful, we ourselves have got to have aculture in which any man is of infinite importance, much more important than thestate, and we can't have seventeen million second class citizens in a culturelike that and have anybody believe it. But it's a slowprocess. It will take a great deal of patience andand good sense.Butit must be done.Mr. Faulkner Do you believe that integration as defined by the Supreme Court will cometo Mississippi at any time in the near future or future? It won't come into Mississippi or anywhere else because of any decisionof any court. That's something that has got to be settled by people. Buttheyes, I think thatwhetherintegration may possibly never come inin the sensethat people think of it, I think that equality for the Negro willcome. I think if the Negro has political equality to vote, if he has economicequality, if he has educational equality, then he won't want to mix with whitefolks any more than white folks wanted to mix him, because I can't imagine anyNegro after thehis experience with white folks wanting to be thatclose to them.But he hashe willget equality. If it's given to him by a Supreme Court ukase and enforced withpolice, as soon as the police are gone then some smart white man or even smartNegro will take his equality away from him again. He has got to be taught theresponsibility of equality. That thethat the Constitution never saideverybody is to have happiness. They want to have the right togain happiness, if they could, andand happiness or freedom issomething that you've got to work for. If itif it were not to beworked for it wouldn't be worth having. It's got to be worked for and defended.Who was the Irish Member of Parliament who said, "ManGod hathvouchsafed man liberty only under condition of eternal vigilance, whichcondition if he break it, servitude is the consequence of his crime, thepunishment of his guilt"? Well, that's true of anyone. You can't have freedomunless you deserve it and work to keep it. That'sand equality, ofcourse, is freedom. which book do you consider to be your greatest book? None of them are good enough for me. They all failed. The onethat I'mI love the best is the one that made the mostsplendid failure, which is The Sound and the Fury. That'sthe one I worked at the hardest, but none of them are good enough, which is why Iwrote another one this year, and I'll write another one next year, and I haveevery intention of living to be about a hundred years old still trying to writea book .Ofcourse, I won't, but I'll still try.  you've written for both TV and motion pictures. I wonderedwhich medium you would prefer to work with? I didn't work for either one seriously because that is not my bent, forthe reason I stated that in either one, it is a matter of compromise, acompromise withwith the actor, with the director, and mainly with thepeople that put up the money. It'sit's so expensive, a TV show, or amoving picture show. I've had a great deal ofof fun working formoving pictures because I liked the people I worked with, but I never tookworking for any of them seriously. It was just a pleasant way to get a checkevery Saturday night, to me. Mr. Faulkner I would like to know what you think of Ernest Hemingway as a writer, whatis your opinion of him? He is a man who hashas never betrayed thehisintegrity, whichwhich one accepts to be a writer. He learned earlyin life a method by which he could do his work. He has never variedfrom that method. Itit suited him. He handled it well. If his workcontinues, then it's going to get better. His last book, I think, The Old Man and the Sea, was the bestbecause he discovered something which he had never found before, which was God.Up to that time his people functioned in a vacuum, they had no past, butsuddenly in The Old Man and the Sea, he found God. Therewas the big fishGod made the big fish that had to becaught. God made the old man that had to catch the big fish. Godmade the shark that had to eat the fish, and God loved all of them.And if hiswork goes on from that, then it willwill still be better, which issomething that not all writers can say. Theytoo manytragically write themselves out too young, and then their lives are unhappy.That happened with Fitzgerald, happened with Sherwood Anderson, and sotheythey go to pieces. can you keep up with the younger generation, theandall the younger people, and what the young people are doing? Or is that too[important]? Not actually. I think that all writers, or maybe allpeople, as they get older, they read less and less. The books I read now are thebooks that I read and loved when I was twenty-one years old. Unless someone putsthe book in my hand and says, "Read this." Then I read it.So Idon'tI'm not too familiar withwith the workofof the young writer nowadays. Young writers come to see me and talkto me, and so I know more young writers than I know their work.  I wondered what's your opinion of John Steinbeck now? Steinbeck to me has probably not done his best work. So far, he's abetter reporter than he is a novelist. And I think maybehis best work is still to come.Sir, what are some of your favorite books? Don Quixote, some of Conrad, Heart of Darkness, The Nigger of the Narcissus, most ofDickens, The Brothers Karamazov, Anna Karenina, MadameBovary, the Old Testament. I suppose I have about fifty that IreadI go in and out like you go into a room to meet old friends. Iopen the book in the middle and read for a little while, and I imagine over thecourse of every ten years, I would have read all of them through.Mr. Faulkner Are these books then indicative of the authors who have written them, andpeople who have had the most influence on you as a writer? I think that any writer is influenced by every word heever read in his life, from the telephone book up and down,that he himself cannot say what book influencedhim at what time. It may be if he went back over his work, he could pick outpages, scenes, and could see the derivation, but he never has time to do thatbecause by that time he's busy writing another book. Actually, as I'vesaidsaid before, one virtue in being a writer is that every time youfinish a book, that's one book you'll never have to read.You're finished with that one. But I'm sure thatany writer is influenced by everything that he has read, by everything he hasseen. He is completely amoral. He will take what he needs from any source, butthen he is willing to reciprocate, that anyone after him can take what they findin his work that they can use,but he'll haveno compunction about stealing right and left. Not deliberately, buthe'sit's his storehouse, and when he needs it, he uses it.This pertains then to both ideas and techniques of writing? Well, ideas in the sense of learning how people behave. I thinkthat he doesn't bother about taking the abstract ideas of otherwriters, because unless that abstract idea fits some character which he himselffeels that he's invented, then he will take it, butbut the fictionwriter is not too interested in ideas any more than he's very interested infacts.That he's interested in people andand in man andhisthe infinite variety of his mutations and his struggles andcomical errors and tragic mistakes and his successes, his hopes.Not in hisideas, but in his eternal conflict with himself, with his fellows, or with hisenvironment. That's what the fiction writer's writing about. Ittakes a philosopher to write about ideas, and most writers have been so busyscribbling from childhood that they never had time to get much schooling to knowmuch about ideas.Mr. Faulkner Sherwood Anderson and T.S. Eliot seem to feel that there has been noclassic since Virgil's Aeneid, and I wonder to what extentyou have grown up in philosophy or ideas. Well, I'm sure if I ever read VirgilI can't remember whetherI did or notI've stolen from him too,for the reason that the writer is influenced by everything heeverever read. But I don't think that as long as the writeris busy writing he's got time to make any didactic statements aboutwhere culture stopped and where it didn't stop. That he's not really interestedin culture or even interested in literature, until he writes himself out, and hehas been corrupted byby books so much that he has nothing else to dowith his time save to take up being a literary man. Most writers are notliterary men. They're reallythey're craftsmen.Then you believe that Mr. Eliot underestimates his culture,apparently? No, no. That he's perfectlyI'm perfectly willing for him tohave his opinions, but to me I ain't interested in it. Mr. Faulkner You said a writer knows when he succeeds or fails, and I gather you don'tuse the critics' opinions as a guide. What gives you the sense of having failedor succeeded in a book? That would probably be the worst day the writer evereverfaces, because then nothing remains but to cut his throat. I think that hewould the only way to express it is what Hemingway meansby saying "to feel good." He finishes the job, andandthere's nothing that is still dangling, nothing more he wants to do to it. It'sfinished. It's complete. As long as it's failed, there's always something youthink, now, if I could just go back and do this over, I could do it better. Butyou know that's a waste of time. The best thing is to take a new story. [gap in tape] all the horror, and difficulty,pessimism[a lot of pessimism] in the worldtoday. Do you sort of take a dim view of the human race surviving, or do youthink we'll go on forever and ever and ever? No, no. I don't think that anything scientists can cook up in alaboratory is going to do away with man. That when this  completing your writing, whether you start writing it or does itdevelop as you go? It usually develops as I go. It can begin with an anecdoteoror an action or a character. Then when enough people get in it tobegin to talk back and forth to each other and to impact on one another and tobegin to quarrel with one another, they take charge of the story. All I have todo then is to trot along behind with a notebook and a pencil and put down whatthey do or say.Then, of course, at the end,you have to go back to the rules of unity and coherence and emphasis and giveit some sort of shape, butbut the characters taketakecharge of the story. That's my own system. Other people work from plots anddiagrams and keep notes. I never had a notebook and never did any research. Mineis done for pleasure, for fun.Willwill A Mansion follows the same characters as The Town? Yes, that's right.Do you see it? You're working on it now? Yes. do you believe that there is a American language developing as compared to the English language, or [that they are]the same language? Yes'm, I think so. I don't know how many generations, eons, before itwill be too distinct, but any language, if it is not changing, will not lastlong. That is, the only alternative to change and progress isdeath. It may be with thewith the world being condensed by rapidtransportation, there'll be even less divergence of the two languages than ever,but I would say that there will bebe achange, and in time, there will be just as much difference between the EnglishEnglish and American English asas there is between classic Greek andmodern Greek, unless both have been abolished in the meantime, and there's stillanother language that comprises both, which will also be in a state of flux andchange and advancement. do you think that an author is actually gettinginto hot water if he doesn't stick to subjects that hehimself has experienced? No, no, the imagination will serve. You stick to experience andobservationare only shortcuts, but imagination willwillwell serve. It'sit has served so many writers when they needI thinkright nowall these books of so-called science fiction,I think of H.G. Wells' Time Machine, that there'sabsolutely no limit to what man can imagine, and heandbyby using a few simple mechanical facts, he can make it credible.That is, nobody can dispute him if what hehe says holds togetherassuming you grant his premise. Thank you. make the statements whichwhich we willfollow, which the rest of the South must follow. I was a little ashamed for allof us when your government issued those invitations and then had to retract someof them, the sort of thing that you'd expect Mississippi to do but Mississippidon't expect Virginia to.  experiences here that I willafter Ihad left Virginia and have thought about it, I will realize more and morehowhow pleasant it was, the contact with the people, the young peoplethat have come into my office with their carefully rehearsed literary questions, and once we get pastthemwe just talk, and that's interesting. Theytheytell me what they want to do and what they think about the condition, what weshould do about it. Almost every day one comes in, and once we get past thestiffness of that first question whichwhich they have rehearsedbecause they're seeing me, then you get down to ahuman being, as someone said the . That'sthat's better. I went out to AlbemarleSchool one morning, and itit took a little thawing but after a while,it became quite well. By the end of it, there was a young man trying to sell mesome cattle. Another man wanted to swap horses with me.  Well, I don't mean this to be a carefully rehearsed literary question,but I did notice in the paper where you mentioned that the Old Testament wasamong your old literary friends, or one of the ones that you like to browse inand re-read Yes.And I realize it is a classic, but I was wondering why the New Testamentdid not have as much to offer? Is it because it is so narrative or some of it isn't useful? To me, the New Testament is full of ideas, and I don't know much aboutideas. The Old Testament is full of people, perfectly ordinary, normal heroesand blackguards just like everybody else nowadays, and I like toread the Old Testament because it's full of people, not ideas. It's people alltrying to get something for nothing or  or to be braver than they are. Just ordinary,everyday folks, peoplethat's why I like to read that. That's apartfrom the fine poetry of theof the prose. I do have a carefully rehearsed one, but I'm really interested in your to build a picture of this vastly materialistic American society whichcan't tolerate a writer or [human beings, even.]And yet you seem to indicate that there was some hope to getforAmericans to get beyond this purely materialisticstage, and yet in your writing, itit seemsthat the Snopeses have triumphed, and I wondered if you'd care to comment onthat. I don't believe I said that our culture can't tolerate it. What I meantto say there was, that so far, our culture is not aware, that there is a forceWe deal in terms of the [humanspirit,] that the day will come when it will have to become awareof it. So far, it doesn't need to, and it's not that it objects. It simply isn't aware yet that that's a force that exists.About the Snopes, theno fiction writer is interested primarily inmessages or warnings, but indirectly and by coincidence, he does suggestmessages and warnings. Thethe story of theSnopes is not: This is what the South is coming to. It'sit's simply:This is what can happen if we don't watch these people. That it's allimaginary. They are underlined for emphasis. They are exaggerated for emphasis.But this is what can happen if we don't watch it. As a student who always had to struggle through literature courses tryingto dig out the meanings of things which seemed obvious to other people, I'd becurious to know if, as a writer,you sort of do have these messages in mind,greater ideas which the English teachers and so forth always produce so readily,and some of the [students] can't find them anywhere. No'm, not really. The writer is writing about people. He has got to usethe tools he has, which is his own experience, his own observation, and out ofthat, in the course ofof twenty-one, twenty-two years it takes tomature, then whatever years after that, come the opinions. He doesn't have tostop and say, "Now, this is what I believe." It's there. He don't know he'sgot it. Then when he writes, suddenly somethingsomebody sayssomething, he says, "Well, yes, that's so. That's what I believe, too." Hedidn't put that in the character's mouth. The character said, "This is what Ithink." The writer says, "Yes, I agree with you." That he is too busy dealingwith people to have time to deliver messages to anyone. The messages happenjust by chance. That he is interested inin creating flesh and bloodpeople to do the tragic or the comic things which people doforfor pleasure. That is, I think that one should read for pleasure,that one doesn't necessarily have to read for pleasure, but I myself read forpleasure, not for ideas.That if it'sI've got to hunt around in a booktolooking for an idea, then I'd rather do something else. I'd ratherdo something that's more fun than that. It won't be reading.  although you primarily write about the South and southernpeople, are you striving for universality, [that people who live in another locality can use it]? That's it. It's to use a locale which the writer is mostfamiliar with. It saves him doing research. That is, if he don't know anythingabout California or Canada or Australia, if he don't do a little research first,he'll write something, and somebody will say, "Hold up here. That ain't so. Thisis the way it is in Australia." Where if he writes about what he knows, nobodyis going to bother him that way because he knows what he is putting down. Peopleare the same, but it's the differences in their background, the milieuthey function in, which is different, not their behavior. But then, of course,the milieu, the background, the environment willwill changethe terms of the behavior, not the act itself, and so the writersimply uses the background he knows just as the carpenter uses thetools that he has at his hand. Rather than to go somewhere to borrow a hammer ora saw, he will use the one he's got, so he won't have to fetch one.  I believe Somerset Maugham said at one time that he felt itwas rather a sad thing in his own life and assumed it to be in the life of anywriter in that he felt that he had to divorce himself from life itself, to acertain extent, in that he was continually observing and thinking in terms ofwriting down what he saw. And I think that possibly he felt a little deprived inthat he had this demon which caused him to want to do this, and that he couldnot live himself more as ordinary people do andwell, in that he wasmore concerned with recording life as he saw it and living [it]was more like a vicarious sense. Do you feel that that istrue of most writers or did you find [something else true]? Well, it is not true ofof me, and I imagine it's not trueofof many other writers. It would be true ofwould be trueofof many other writers. I think that Maugham,of an olderolder culture, had more time to be thatobjective about his own subsubjectivity, if you can accept thatparadoxical statement. I think that maybe Henry James, forinstance, had the same approach toward his work that Maugham did, but HenryJames had not got far enough to realize that that was depriving himof something that he didn't want to be deprived of. That is, Henry Jamesprobably was quite happy to live detached from life to write HenryJames. I hesitate to ask such a broad question, sir, but what effect do youthink McCarthyism has had on freedom of thought and expression in Americanuniversities? I would say that McCarthyism, that whole thing, has had agood effect on American universities in that it hashas shown, notthe educated man, but has shown a lot ofof uneducatedpeople what that sort of thing can cause, that uneducated people have a greaterbelief in thethatthoughtthe freedom of thought must be inviolable, that they never thoughtabout it before, and so, in that sense, McCarthy served a purpose. It's too badthat that should be one of the curses of democracy, too, that that purposecan'tmust be paid for with the three or four years of McCarthy. In away, democracy has the capacity to use, somehow, almost everything.  thisthis is a question about your way ofwriting. I was wondering whether youyou constantly [go about] the writing, or whether it just comes out all atonce. Because to read a book of yours, it seems to come all at once, but I just wondered, you hear of so many writerswho are working over their novels and rewriting parts until they'refinished. That depends, and I don't think that any writer could have a hard andfast rule about it. In my own case, I'm lazy. That is, I don't like to sit downandand put a hundred thousand words on paper. I hate to face the factthat I've got to do it. I will put that off as long as possible, and so in themeantime, as much of the revising as possible happens up here. Then when thedemon won't let me alone any longer I sit down to write, and I tryto do it so I won't have to revise it, won't have to do it again.Sometimes it works. Sometimes I'll have to re-write and re-write and re-writeand re-write.Sometimes itit never comes out to suit me. I'llthrow it away. But occasionally I'm lucky, and the first time's enough.But nowriter can know beforehand whether he'll have to do it once or a dozen times,but he has got to please himself, and he willhe will curse it. Hewill curse his fate that he ever got into such a racket, but he will keep onuntil it's the best he can do with it.  There was a young ladyback there thatI was just wondering if you thought that some sort of form of governmentsubsidysome of the European writers ? I don't think I heard that too well. If you will [tell me again, ma'am]?Do you think that artists in this country would benefit from some form ofgovernment subsidization [that is like] like the authorprograms Italy has or ? I don't think that an artist should be subsidized too much by anyone. Ithink that he has got to be free, and even a little hardship maybe good for him. ThatI'm assuming that most artists are like me,andand they are lazy, and if they had too much money, they would dothat much less work.That if they ain't gotmuch money, just enough to buy a little tobacco and occasionally a drinkandand something to eat, that they might work a little more. If itwas too easy for them, they would put off the work. Thatnow, that'sdifferent from the opera because opera, theater, requires so much more moneythan the cost of a ream of paper andand three or four pencils, sotheater has got to be subsidized, andand if private capital is everobliterated then there will have to be subsidy to print the books, butthe artist himself shouldn't be subsidized too much. He would be alittle better off if he had to hold another job andand wrote in hisspare time because that would keep his work on theplane of the amateur, which it should be. That when he begins to think ofhimself as a professional writer, he is sunk. He's got to do it because it'sfun. It's got to be a hobby. Sir, I'm [going to] put you on the spot with this. You say that awriter must write truth, and he musttherefore he must search for truth. If ArthurMiller is found guilty of contempt on the grounds that, as he claims,moralhis own moral character, which kept him from revealing the namesof other writers in his [cell that he once visited], would youpublicly come out in favor of his position? Sure. Yes, if therethere's something you believeis wrong to do, then don't do it, no matter who else disagrees withyou. That would have nothing to do withwhat whether he writes fromnow on, whether he's in contempt ofof court or not. Whether he issent to jail or not would have nothing to do with what he writes. Yes, if youbelieve that something is wrong to do, don't do it.Are there any other questions? Well,we want you toknow how glad we are that your demon let you come over here tonight and be withus, and we'll all remember this as a highlight of this year and probably a longtime to come. Thank you, ma'am. has consented to come and talk to us about "The Old Man." We've been talkingabout "The Old Man" for the last week and been discussing itits structure andits meaning and its techniquesin isolation, unconnected with the work withwhich it was originally published in alternating chapters, TheWild Palms. Our questions to Mr. Faulkner will be completelyunrehearsed and unscreened, according to your desire, and I think this is thefirst time that you've talked to a freshman class, and so it will be interestingto observe what emerges. Mr. Faulkner has consented to begin the meeting byreading the end of "The Old Man." Mr. Faulkner. That was all, the convict told them. They left thesawmill fast, he had no time to buy food until they reached the nextnextlanding. There he spent the whole sixteen dollars he had earned and theywent on. The River was lower now, there was no doubt of it, and sixteendollars' worth looked like a lot of food and he thought maybe it would do,would be enough. But maybe there was more current in the River still than itlooked like. But this time it was Mississippi, it was cotton; the plowhandles felt right to his palms again, the strain and squat of the thick buttocks against the middle buster's blade was what he knew, even thoughthey paid but a dollar a day here. But that did it. He told it: they toldhim it was Saturday again and paid him and he told about itnight, a smokedlantern in a disc of worn and barren earth as smooth as silver, a circle ofcrouching figures, the importunate murmurs and ejaculations, the meagrepiles of worn bills beneath the crouching knees, the dotted cubes clickingand scuttering in the dust; that did it. "How much did you win?" the secondconvict said. "Enough," the tall one said.  "How much?""Enough," the tall one said. It wasenough exactly; he gave it all to the man who owned the second motor boat(he would not need food now), he and the woman in the launch now and theskiff towing behind it, the woman with the baby and the paper-wrapped parcelbeneath his peaceful hand, on his lap; almost at once he recognised, notVicksburg because he had never seen Vicksburg, but the trestle beneath whichon his roaring wave of trees and houses and dead animals he had shot,accompanied by thunder and lightning, a month and three weeks ago; he lookedat it once without heat, even without interest as the launch went on. Butnow he began to watch the bank, the levee. He didn't know how he would knowbut he knew he would, and then it was early afternoon and sure enough themoment came and he said to the launch owner: "I reckon this will do."  "Here?" the launch owner said. "This dont look likeanywhere to me.""I reckon this is it," the convict said. So the launch putinshore, the engine ceased, it drifted up and lay against the levee and theowner cast the skiff loose."You better let me take you on until we come tosomething," he said. "That was what I promised.""I reckon this will do,"the convict said. So they got out and he stood with the grapevine painter inhis hand while the launch purred again and drew away, already curving; hedid not watch it. He laid the bundle down and made the painter fast to awillow root and picked up the bundle and turned. He said no word, he mountedthe levee, passing the mark, the tide-line of the old raging, dry now andlined, traversed by shallow and empty cracks like foolish and deprecatorysenile grins, and entered a willow clump and removed the overalls and shirtthey had given him in New Orleans and dropped them without even looking tosee where they fell and opened the parcel and took out the other, the known,the desired, faded a little, stained and worn, but clean, recognisable, andput them on and returned to the skiff and took up the paddle. The woman wasalready in it.  The plump convict stood blinking at him. "So you comeback," he said. "Well well." Now they all watched the tall convict as he bitthe end from the cigar neatly and with complete deliberation and spat it outand licked the bite smooth and damp and took a match from his pocket andexamined the match for a moment as though to be sure it was a good one,worthy of the cigar perhaps, and raked it up his thigh with the samedeliberationa motion almost too slow to set fire to it, it would seemandheld it until the flame burned clear and free of sulphur, then he put it to thecigar. The plump one watched him, blinking rapidly and steadily. "And theygive you ten years more for running. That's bad. A fellow can get used towhat they give him at first, to start off with, I dont care how much it is,even a hundred and ninety-nine years. But ten more years. Ten years more, ontop of that. When you never expected it. Ten more years to have to dowithout no society, no female companionship" He blinked steadily at thetall convict. But he (the tall convict) had thought of that too. He had hada sweetheart. That is, he had gone to church singings and picnics with heragirl a year or so younger than he, short-legged, with ripe breasts and aheavy mouth and dull eyes like ripe muscadines, who owned a baking-powdercan almost full of ear-rings and brooches and rings bought (or presented atsuggestion) from ten-cent stores. Presently he had divulged his plan to her,and there were times later when, musing, the thought occurred to him thatperhaps if it had not been for her he would not actually have attempted itthis a mere feeling, unworded, since he could not have phrased this either:that who to know what Capone's uncandled bridehood she might not havedreamed to be her destined fate, what fast car filled with authenticcolored glass and machine guns, running traffic lights. But that was allpast and done when the notion first occurred to him, and in the third monthof his incarceration she came to see him. She wore ear-rings and a braceletor so which he had never seen before and it never became quite clear how shehad got that far from home, and she cried violently for the first threeminutes though presently (and without his ever knowing either exactly howthey had got separated or how she had made the acquaintance) he saw her inanimated conversation with one of the guards. But she kissed him before sheleft that evening and said she would return the first chance she got,clinging to him, sweating a little, smelling of scent and soft young femaleflesh, slightly pneumatic. But she didn't come back though he continued towrite to her, and seven months later he got an answer. It was a postcard, acolored lithograph of a Birmingham hotel, with a childish X inked heavily acrossone window, the heavy writing on the reverse slanted and primer-like too:This is where were honnymonning at. Your friend (Mrs)Vernon Waldrip  The plump convict stood blinking at the tall one,rapidly and steadily. "Yes, sir," he said. "It's them ten more years thathurt. Ten more years to do without a woman, no woman a tall a fellow wants"He blinked steadily and rapidly, watching the tall one. The other did notmove, jackknifed backward between the two bunks, grave and clean, the cigarburning smoothly and richly in his clean steady hand, the smoke wreathingupward across his face saturnine, humorless, and calm. "Ten more years""Women 'blank'!" the tall convict said. Was there something that influencedyou to write this story? Yes, the story I was trying totell was the story ofofof Charlotte and Harry Wilbourne. I decided that itneeded a contrapuntal quality like music, and so I wrote the other storysimply to underline the story of Charlotte and Harry. I wrote the twostories by alternate chapters. I'd write the chapter of one and then I wouldwrite the chapter of the other just as the musician puts inputs counterpointbehind the theme that he is working with.  Well, why don't, in this story, none of the characters have names? To me, the story was simply forbackground effect, andand they didn't need names. They just needed to be peoplein motion doing the exact opposite thing to the tragedy ofof Harry andCharlotte in the other story. To me they didn't need namesthat they were nottoo important.  Sir, I noticed that you do have some names, though, in your story. Somenames are mentioned, such as Bledsoe, the convict. Do youdo you have them in for anyreason? Well, the girl that jiltedhim, she had to have a name to sign to the postcard. The other people, ifIdon't remember the rest of the story because I haven't read it in about thirtyyears, but when they had names it was for that reason, as simple as that.Atat the moment they had to have a name.  Well, in the swamp, three of the men who lived in the swamp, [you gave them the]names Tine and Toto and Theule, and I wonder if those names had any type ofsignificance or were supposed to be any type of literary allusion. They'rerather colorful names, I think. No, I don't think so. They werewere names, you might say, indigenous tothat almost unhuman class of people which live between the Mississippi River andthe levee. They belong to no state. They belong to no nation. Theythey are notcitizens of anything, and sometimes they behave like they don't even belong tothe human race.So, you have had experiences with these people? Yes. Yes, I remember once I wasgoingone of them was going to take me hunting. He invited me to come and staywith his kinfolks, whatever kin they were I never did knowa shanty boat in theriver, and I remember the next morning for breakfast we had a bought chocolatecake and a cold possum and corn whiskey.Theyhad given me the best they had. I was company. They hadhad given me the bestfood they had. If I may ask a question pursuingthis idea. I believe that earlier in your life that you did quite a bit oftraveling and had a lot of experiences as an apprentice seaman, I believe, andflying. Do you think thatto any author or even more generally, to anyone whowants to formulate ideas about life and all, do you think that this is veryvaluable while younger to travel around and not be fixed down, or? Well, itit don't do you any harm,but it'syou don't have to do it. Homer probably didn't do a great deal oftraveling, and he did pretty well as a writer. Ithat is, the material you write from has got to be a good deal more thanjust what you can see and remember. It'sit's got to be observation, experiencewhichand part of experience is what you readplus imagination. So theobservationdon't hurt you. You may need it, but you can get along without it ifyou have to with the imagination and experience.I think the best source to learnto be a writer is from reading, what the best, the giants ofof the pasthave done.   did the tall convict in "The Old Man" believe in God? He probably hadn't got around tothat yet. His background would be the bucolic, provincial Southern Baptist,and it may be a debatable question whether that sort of Baptist believes inGod or not, but Probably when he got older andgot out of the penitentiary, if he ever did, and he didn't need to expend toomuch energy trying to have fun any more, he might have taken up religion, mighthave been a professor of, God whether he believed it or not or even know whatGod was. But at this time he wouldwould have said he did, and if anyone hadtold him he didn't, he would have fought him, but he probably didn't know whatGod meant.It seems to me in reading the bookthat he was depending a lot on fate to lead his lifethat he would be led byfate [as much as religion]. Well, he depended more onhimself, that to him fate was just his bad luck, the sort of thing thatshouldn't happen to a dog. But he depended on himself, that hehe knew what hewanted, which was to be secure, to be back in that penitentiary. That'swhere he was secure because he didn't mind hard work. He didn't know anythingelse. And suddenly he was flung out into the world with another woman, and allhe wanted was to get rid of that woman and get back there where he was safe. Buthe didn't dependhe was doing the best he could. He depended on his ownefforts.Well, when he got back, sir, didhe share this view with the others that it was ten years without womenI mean,do you think he minded this? No, no. He had had enough ofwomen. After that girl had jilted himshe was the one that put himthere. It was to get a lot of money to buy her a lot more of the Woolworthbracelets and rings. If it hadn't been for her, he wouldn't have been there. Hewould have been back at his Mississippi hill home working hard all day long anddrinking a little corn whiskey on Saturday nights and gambling. Sir, I'm interested in your saying that. I'd taken it that he had robbed the train more for the adventure and to be able to [say that he had evaded]the authorities, rather than for the money. No. He wanted to please thatgirl. He didn't need a lot of money. He was doing all right with his mule, hislittle piece of corn land, but suddenly he ran into a girl that wanted a lot ofWoolworth rings, and so he had to turn robber to get those rings. Well, is this [inability] or desire not to face women also [the kindof thing] that the plump convict wound up in thispenitentiarybecause he didn't want to face the raging woman with whom he hadcommitted this crime? Diddo you mean this also to be his desire not to facelife into face reality or the return to the womb? You mentioned, tooyouspoke of Christmas as being chained by a "clanking umbilical" and we talkedabout this in thisin my class, his jackknife position and the whole idea ofescaping from lifedodoes the woman here, especially the pregnant woman, representlife in this sense? Not to the convict. That is, notconsciously. Heall he wanted to escape from was insecurity. Heanyone thatcould be taken over the jumps by the sort of girl that wasthat got himinto undertaking to be a bank robber couldn't have been very mature mentally.That convict was probably still about fifteen or sixteen years old. And like aboy ofof fifteen or sixteen, the first shock ofof disappointment in love, hethinks is going to last forever. Of course, it don't, but that's what hethinks, and the convict never had grown up yet. Don't you think the seven weeks of[there], theseven years he lost ? Well, now that's the sort ofthing that if any reader likes to find that in the writer's work, he is, as faras the writer is concerned, perfectly welcome to find it, but the writer ain'tgot time to watch all thoseall those corners andand symbols andimplications, so it's very possible you're right, butbut I never thought ofthat before.  Do you think that if the convict had not been given the extra tenyearsdo you think he would have returned to the security of prison or to thesecurity of his home? Well, that extra ten years meantnothing to him because he was mentally about sixteen or seventeen years old,and anythingany sum of time longer than one year is all the same to you whenyou're fifteen or sixteen years oldthat in another year, and you'll be an oldman anyway, and so what's ten years more or a hundred years to him?  Getting back to this security or insecurity, do you think that enoughbackground was given of the tall convict before he was inin the penitentiary,before he was sentencedto leave him feel insecuredo you think that he firstbecame insecure when he was in the penitentiary for so long a time beingout of it, ofof being insecure? No, I would that the insecuritycame to him with a shock when that woman betrayed him, and he was frightened, andhe wanted to be where no other woman could catch him off balance andtake him over the jumps again. And the place where he was safe from that was inthat penitentiary, which wasn't so different from the life he would have led ifhe'd been home. He would have had to work very hard all day long at home. Hewould have had very little for it, which was just what he got there, but atleast behind that barbed wire fence he was safe from another woman that wouldget him into the highwayman business.Do you think he would have stayedon the island with the Cajuns ifhadn't they had to leave? No, no. He had to get rid ofthat woman, and the only way he knew to get rid of her was to bring her back tothe folks that sent him to get her. Remember, he'smentally only about fifteenor sixteen years old, and by his own lights, he's quite honorable anddependable. They had sent him out with a boat to get two people, and he did thebest he could to get the two people and bring them and the boat back.  Well, whyI know that you said that the woman was almost exactly like himImean the same type of background and everything, and also the woman must haverealized that he was trying to get her back, but don't youwas the woman alsoin this immature state that she didn't realize that she could get back morequickly when they were in this armory, which is where they had all these otherpeople, she was glad to leave with him, and whenwhen she was just about ready tohave her child, and sheshe made, as I recall, nono cry to the people in thishouseboat to let her come aboard. She was content almost, it seems like, to juststick with him. Why is this? I mean, why didn't she try to better herself? She didn't know how. She was asignorant as he was. She came from the same class of people that he came from.She was ignorant. She wasshe was afraid of strangers. Of course, the convictwas a stranger to her, too, but they had been hurled together by a circumstance,and it probably didn't take her very long to find out that all that convictwanted was to get her back where he got her from and get rid of her, and that'swhat she wanted, tooto get back and find her husband. She probably had ahusband. She may have had other children, and she wanted to get back just as badas he did, and since hehe was the man, her instinct was to let the man runthings.  Did you mean to showmiscarriage of justice byhaving the additional ten years, or rather just to show that although it seemedlike injustice, that the jail warden was doing [exactly] whatshould have been done anyway [just] because of his knowledge ofthe people under his care? That additional ten yearswas simply another quantity inin fate, just like the flood that he raninto. Once he was in it, he had to accept the extra ten years, just as heaccepted the flood and worked through it and survived it. There was nono moreinjustice than there was to the flood. It was just something that was in theculture, the economy ofof the land he lived in, just like that flood wasinherent in thein the geography and the climate, and he was a man thatsaid, Well, if this is what it is, I'll do the best I can to tough through it.That would have been his philosophy. So when you set out to start a novel such as this, do you have acomplete story in mind or is it just a thought that you build upon as you goalong? You remember this was a counterpoint to the other story. This to me wasn't too important, that thesewere just thethe orchestration of sounds that the musician puts back of thetheme of his symphony. That I didn't know where this story was goingIjust wrote it. I was as surprised as anybody else to find where it was going,but the story that I was trying to tell was the story ofof Charlotte andHarry.And when you reached the pointwhere he met the woman, what was your purpose of having a pregnant woman? ItI thought that made itfunnier. To me all this is funny.Alittlelittle more comical to show this man who meant well, to get involvedinin all sorts of things that would have made a weaker or less centered manblench and falter, but not him. It was because he was just stupid and ignorantenough to bull right on through this, to accept anything the gods threw athim without even knowing that he was being tried.  Well, if this is primarily funny, and I dothink that there's humor all through it, why do you put the humorin where you do, for example, the womanI don't recall the remarkbut she's justabout ready to have her child, and you say something about hold on a littlelonger. It's an impossible thing. And then he's been kicked by akicked by thetail of the alligator, and she asks him if he's been kicked, and he says, no,that [if] he'd got hit in the rear end with a pea shooter. [It would make]there's humor all the way through, and theneven at the end, do you still want the message ofthisseeming injustice of society against him to come through or isthat secondary? Well, it'ssecondary is notreally wrong because it wasthe injustice was necessary to make the story funny,and so it's not secondary because it was quite important, to make the storyfunny. It'sit's a fact, and if one begins to write about the injustice ofsociety, then one has stopped being primarily a novelist and has become apolemicist or a propagandist. The fiction writer is not that. He will use theinjustice of society, the inhumanity of people, as as any other tool intelling the story, whichwhich is about people, not about the injustice or theinhumanity of people, but of people, with their aspirations and their strugglesand the bizarre, the comic, and the tragic conditions they get theminthemselves into simply coping with themselves and one another andenvironment.   I think you must have put a great deal of time behindchoosing the title of "The Old Man." I know you took it from the river, but Iwonder what else you had in mind. Possibly does the river symbolize any otherthings or maybe nature or something else? No. It'sit's not "The Old Man,"it's "Old Man." That's what the Negroes along the river call the river. Theynever call it the Mississippi nor the river. It's just Old Man. And this had tohave some title and so that struck me as being a good title for it. That referssimply to the river.Did the tall convict have anysubconscious attitudes toward [the Mississippi]? No, he'd never seen it before.It was just a lot of water to him not behaving like any water he ever saw beforebehave, but it wasthat was just something that you ran into and you had tohandle it the best you could. He never did know where he was and didn't reallycare.In the book, you had elaborated tosome extent on the fact that the Oldthe Old Man was fruitful and life-givingand such, and what it was to farmers and just to the people who lived along theMississippi, and to that area. Itit was fruitful and not a destructiveforce. Well, the destructive quantity had to be accepted, too. That country where this took place wasis alluvial.It's lower than the river itself. In the winter, it stayed under water fromfromthe fall rains sometimes as late as June. That was why they had to build thelevees, and so in the spring and the summer, the river is higher than theland. There's a levee, and then you look up in the sky and there goes asteamboat. If the levee ever gives way, the country will be flooded again. It'srich because the river forfor hundreds of years had deposited the rich silton top of the ground.And so the river dominates not only the economy ofthat country, but itit dominates itsits spiritual life. That the river ismaster [of it], and any time the Old Man wants to he cancanbreak the levee and can ruin the cotton crop. That, in a way, you'retheplanter is at armistice with him, and the superstitious planter believes that hehas got to make libations, make sacrifices to him. That every so often he'sgot to let the Old Man come in and take that cotton crop to keep the Old Man ina contented frame of mind, like the ancients withwith the dragon, theMinotaur, the symbols ofof destructiveness which they had to placate,sacrifice.  In putting this woman in the boat with the convict, did you want to drawa point to the lovers in the novel that went along with it or did you just puther in the boat as sort of a hindrance to progress and ? No, that was a definiteparallel. Thethe isolation, the solitude ofof the boat in that raging torrentwas the solitude which Harry and Charlotte hadhad tried so long to find,where they could be lovers, to escape fromfrom the world. They went to infinitelabor and risk and sacrifice to escape from the world where this convict hadbeen hurled out of the world against his will, whether he wanted to or not. Thathe andand the woman he saved had what Charlotte andandand Wilbourne hadsacrificed everything to get. That's what I mean by counterpoint to the theme ofthe other book, that these two people had what Charlotte and Harry had given upeverythingrespectability, future, everything, for.  Sir, the short fat convict which you placed in the book, you call himyousay he's somewhat like [something]one might find under alog. Is he there just to emphasize the qualities of the tall convict? That's right. And to havesomebody for the tall convict toor to dig out of the tall convict what hadhappened. The tall convict would never have told this himself. He'd just said hewas away for a while and had a pretty hard time, but here he is. That's all hecould have told about what happened to him.  You said that the convict wasn't afraid of work, so he returned. Yet whenhe was in the swamp with the Cajuns you say that he had forgotten what work waslike or something like that. Do you make a distinction between work for a rewardand then work simply for the sake of something to do? He had been so busy trying to keep that boat from being swamped and toget them along from one day to another, which was terrific work, but to him thatwasn't work, anymore than somebody falling off a roof that scrabbles atatshingles andand chimney pots would consider himself working. Work to himwas the orderlythe work offrom sunup to sundown and then you restedand then tomorrow you worked again.But he did consider the work at the prison just as much as Yes, but he hadhe had been gonefrom there a long time, to him. That must have seemed like years to him that hehadhad been in that boat with that woman, who was a nuisance.  You sort of drawyou drew a line somewhere in there between the work atthe prison and the work with thewith the alligators because he seemed to workjust as hard trapping the alligators because he was going to get part of theprofits from the alligators. That's right.Was therediddid that make a difference in the type ofin the work[that] he was doing and the way he went about it when hewent to prison? Well, work to him meant theorderly work of following a mule in a furrow. Catching alligators to himwasn't work ininby his lights anymore than struggling with that boat was workand thesolitude, but shebut she wasn't enoughhe had to go and getinto trouble over somebody else's wife. What did the tremendous wave signify and what caused it? That simply is a physical fact in that country when a levee breaks. Thewater rushed through the crevasse, and itit came to the lowest place,which was a stream, which up to that time had been flowing toward the river.This wave of water from theat that time the river, the Mississippi,was forty feet higher than the country, and when that levee gaveway, that mass of water that came through had to go somewhere,and it broke on the east side of the river, so that wave of water simplycontinued to go east until it spent itself, and in thisthis stream,which up till that time had been flowing placidly west, it turned around and ranbackward. That's just a physical fact ofof hydraulics andlevee. It seems that you draw a picture for yourself before youdraw a picture.Do you do that in your writing itself when you are writing a book, draw anotherpicture for yourself before? Oh, well, any writer puts down what he sees and what he hears, and thatimage andand that sound come from the proper blending of observation,experience, and imagination. Yes, you've got to see what youthe sceneyou describe. You've got to hear the voice speaking the speech that you putdown. You'veyou have to hear the vernacular he speaks in, rather thanto think of the speech and then translate into thevernacular. Sir, you wantto establish the intellectual level of these peopleyou're talking about, but I noticed we're missing this Mississippi accent whichis so prevalent in those people. You made no attempt tosimulate that in the dialect. Is there any reason for that? If the writer puts too much attention to transcribing literallythe dialogue he hears, it's confusing to people who have neverheard that speech. That is, somesome of the words are difficult tospell. They would beto a Mississippian, he would see the wordsspelled the way a Mississippian would spell it, he would know how it sounded,but to an outlander, he wouldn't know. He would mispronounce that word wrong.You cancan go only so far withwith dialect, and thenthere's a point where forfor the simple reason not to make too muchdemand on the writer, to distract his attention from the story you're telling,you've got to draw the line. Sir, you said imagination is [enough for] writing.It makes a good writer. Do you believe that Thomas Wolfeuses a lot of imagination in his writing, or do you think that he just wrote primarily from experience? I think that no writer writes primarily from experience or observationor imagination. It's as though he has three tanks with three lines and maybe amixing valve, and he draws from that tap, from all three of them, and he himselfcan never say how much of this was imagination, how much was observation, howmuch was experience. Hehe couldn't and then hehe wouldn'tbother to because that's not too important. If what he tells seems real andseems true, then how much of what came from where and when makes no differenceto him. It's a rather small passage, but in one place he's on the Indian moundwith the woman, and he's lost his oar, and he's trying to make a new one, and hehas this dream that he's tryingthat he's back at the bunk house, andhe's attempting to sleep, but there is a mule, John Henry, keeps trying to crawlinto bed with him, and he licks him with his cold tongue. Is that supposed tohave any special symbolism such as work or anything or is this? No, no, that's what it felt like to him when whatever the animal wasthat was crawling over him while he was asleep made him think of.Hehe reduced that to his own imagination, observation,and experience. When did you come into the close contact with a flood on the Mississippithat the text would indicate and when did you observe all these things, the waythe flood happened and so forth? . Hmmm, why, I can't say. I've known it all my life. That is, this countryis not very far from where I was born and have lived all my life,and I have known these people. I have known that country. Every fall as long asI can remember, we would go there to hunt bear and deer, which was close to thelevee, and so we would know these people. They would cross the levee and comeinto our camp. They wouldthey were lawless people. They would bebeggars, and on occasion they would be thieves, but if we were everbenightedlost at nightwe could go to their shanty boatsand shacks, and they would give us what they had to eat and let us sleep that night. On several occasions the tall convict is plagued by this nose bleed thathe can't control. This usually follows some period where he's had a greatstruggle and shown his bravery and his strength, such as with the alligator. Isthis helplessness in the face of this nose bleed supposed to be a humorouscontrast with his strength and his usual self-sufficiency? Or did you want to? Well, to me that was just something else comical andandbizarre that should havehe should be afflicted with that also. Withall his other troubles, he hadhad thatwhat's the name of it, the ailmentwhen your blood won't clot?Hemophilia. Yes, that on top of everything else, he had to have that, too. This is just one sentence which I wonder about. In the beginning of thisfinal chapter, and you toldyou sort of described the Governor'semissary, and you say that he just sat down on the desk, you say "almost betweenthe warden and the caller, the emissary" and you saythis is thesentence or these are the sentences: "Or the vizier, V-I-Z-I-E-R, with thecommand, the knotted cord, has began to appear immediately." Exactly what doesthat mean? I Oh, that's Eastern, from the Middle East. When the sultandecided he was tired of aof a courtier he would send his Prime Ministerwith a knotted cord to suggest that he choke himself to death. That's all. Sir, when you write any of your novels, do you usually have a definiteidea of how it's going to happen and outline it or do you justlet the novel carry itself as you go along? Sometimes there is a general idea of what the end might be.That is, an anecdote or a scene, or it could be a scene at theat thefirstfirst of the book, or I don't know until I start where the scenemight come. It could begin with a character, or it could begin withawith an idean idea out of man's condition. That is, in Absalom, Absalom!that began with the idea of a man thatwanteda ruthless man that wanted a son and got so many that theydestroyed one another and destroyed him, but the idea almost at once producedthe protagonist, which was the man himself. Some writers, I think, have to have aplot. Theythey do research. They have notebooks and graphs and chartsand things, but I never have worked that way. Mine begin withwith a scene or an anecdote to write toward, or with a character, and after thecharacters, the people come alive, then all the writer has to do is to trotalong beside them with a notebook and a pencil, and put down what they say anddo. Of course, at the end, you've got to use some discipline, to doediting, to pick and choose and make thegive the whole thingcoherence and emphasis at the right place and unity, but with me, the characterstake charge of the story, and all I have to do is just put down what they do andsay. Sir, this is slightly [pointing out] toward anothertangent. We were having a discussion in our class as to whether ErnestHemingway's novel For Whom the Bell Tolls was didactic ornot. Would you give your opinion to that? I would say simply that Hemingway was writingwell, in asense, the same storyevery writer in a way is writing onestory. That hethere's one thing in man's condition that seems to himthe most moving, the most tragic, and this time Hemingway was writing the storywhich still seemed to him moving and tragic, which like all writers he never hadtold well enough to please him. This one was brought into urgency bythe condition [gap in tape], that he was not reallywriting primarily about the Spanish Civil War, but he was writing aboutthe human condition, which to him was moving and tragic in theterms of that war. Does the writer write usually from urge or from a sense of ? A little of both. I think that most writers aredemon-driven. Whether to say that it'she has to ororwhether it's an urge, it's difficult to say, but he is driven by a demon, thathe has found this world amazing andand disturbing or tragic or comicor anyway passionate enough, so that he has got to use the time he's on earthto express maybe his appreciation of the fact that he lived for a little while.Maybe he's in a way saying, "Much obliged God that I was here for a while."Itit's a demon, that he's driven by that.Does the writer ever get involved in more than one bookat a time? Oh, yes. Yes, I've writtenone time I was working on three atone time. I have written awhile on one and put it aside and then write another,then come back to the first one again.  Let's see. We'llhave to start at the left. Does thedoes the convict in "The Old Man" gain his strength fromthe fact that he does have the mind of a sixteen- or seventeen-year-old andhis perceptions are limited? No, I wouldn't say he gained his strength from that. I would say that hegained his strength because he had aa very simple moralstandard. That he made one aberration from it because he was tempted by Delilah,but he wouldhe would never make that aberration again, and hethehethe reason for the security he wanted was that he would neverbe tempted, he would believe that he wouldn't, that his ownstrength would keep him from being taken over the hurdles by another womanlike that, but he wasn't too sure. He knew as long as he was inthat penitentiary, and he was expiating the crimehedid something wrong, he knew that, and he was expiating his crime. He wasdoing the best he could to lead a decent life while he was there, to expiate hiscrime against society. He had a standard of morals, and that was, Ithink, his strength. He had been sent out to rescue two people in aflood, and he did the best he could to rescue both of them and bring them back.That took a certain sort of morality to do that. He could have escaped at anytime, but he didn't. Do you condone his attempt to escape from his insecurity? Imean, do you think it's commendable to do what one wants even though it'sescape, or do you think that one should try and better himself.And should hehave become a trustee andand attempted to face life moresquarely? I think people should never judge one another.Least of all should thewriter judge his characters. I think that man istrying to do better than he thinks he can maybe, that he wants to be braver,more honorable. He wants to have compassion. He'she'safraid that maybe he won't, that maybe he won't be as brave as he wants to be,and then suddenly something happens, and he finds to his astonishment that hewas as brave as he wanted to be, that he is as honorable as he wanted to be,that he does have compassion, so I wouldI would never judge him. IwouldI would say about him that withinhis lights to have accepted a condition and to do the best he canin it, whether that best is very intelligent or not is not tooimportant. The fact is that by his lights he's doing the best he can in acondition. He's not whining to anybody. He didn't ask forfor thatcondition, but there it is, and he's going to do the best in it. He's not goingto whine, and I think that's admirable. Sir, you have painted his fellow convicts as being almostanimalsthey turn their backs to the rain, and they crowd around theempty stove in the train, and theythey seem to have absolutely nopersonality. They'rethey're just animals. Would the tall convict havebeen exactly the same? He would, yes. That is the result of having been inprison. Being in prison makes a man an animal. What it dividesdeprives him of is thething that differentiates him from beast, which is the capacity for free will,for liberty, freedom, and so, of course, they were animals to turn their backsto a rain andandand hover over the symbol ofofheat and warmth. That's the bad thing about prison, about deprivation of simpleliberty and free willworst thing can happen to you. Did you show that the convict had high moral standards in one[sense][by emphasizing] the moral standards of Charlotte andHarry and ? No, no. I wasn't interested in the convict's moral standards any morethan I was interested in Harry's and Charlotte's. I was simply writing aboutpeople. I was writing the story ofof a man and a womanwhowho threw away everything for love, and the storywasn'twasn't emphasized, it wasn't moving enough, so Iwrote the second story ofof a man and a woman who got the very thingthat Harry and Charlotte had thrown away everything to have and wasn't happyuntil the man, the convict, got rid of it. I wasn't writing about their moralstandards. They themselves exposed their moral standards to me simply by doingand saying things which I transcribe, put down. Sir, when you write a book, do you write just to or at a certain group ofpeople, because when a person starts reading your book, his first [shock,as you said,] was the length of your sentences, first of all, andby the insight which is required to get to the meat out of the story, to get themeaning that you want to convey. Do you write to [an] aboveaverage class of people, [or I should say], way above average [class ofpeople]? No, I don't think any writer does that. I know that in my own case Iwrote books for years before it ever occurred to me that strangers might readthem. The writer is demon-driven. He is writing something which seemed to himsoso moving, so tragic, so passionate, that he had toput it down in his short span on this earth if for no other reason than to say Iwas here.That he is not writing atat the time whenthewhen the fire is hot, and the demon hasis really gothim at a dead run for anybody. He's simply trying toputput thisthis passionate dream that he has seen orimagined down. Later on, he begins to realize that people do read it, but at thetime hehe's not interested in that. He hasn't thought about that. Thefirst one wasn't good enough, so he's busy writing another one. He hasn't hadtime yet to realize that people will read it. Judging from that, sir, you might say your ideayour idea ofa true author isn't one who sculpts his material toward the commercial side? That's right. Yes, if what he wants is money, then thereare probably easier ways to make money than being an author. I thinkthat the young man or young woman that wants to write will haveto make that choice. He has got to decide, "Do I want to do this becauseI have a demon that won't let me alone or do I want to make some money at this?"I think, in the case ofof the men and women who have been the goodwriters, that choice never occurred to them, that they had never had to stop todecide, "I have a choice to make, now, which shall I choose," becausehe has made that choice. The alternative has never occurred to him, any morethan he would choose, "Now shall I be a writer or shall I be a banker?" That if hewants to be a banker, he will be a banker, but he will be a writer, too. If hewants to be a doctor, he will be a doctor, but if he has a demon to write hewill still be a writer, too. He will find plenty of time to be a writer, be apainter, be anything else. Have you been approached, and I'm sure you have, to express yourself in amedium other than a book or a play? For instance, have you ever been asked towrite a television play or a movie [that implies] . Well, when I have needed money, I have worked for moving pictures andtelevision, but that was simply a pleasant way to get a check everySaturday night, and it had nothing to do with writing. It was just a job.  Would you comment on drama as a literary form, [putting onthe] plays that perhaps were never meant for production. Do youlike this type [of art]? Well, I think that the play isororthe novel, the short story, that is a medium whichfits the writer's temperament best. It may be that someone who thinks in termofof the drama sees more of what he wants to write than he hears.Maybe the man whoor woman who instinctively takesthe novel form hears voices rather than sees. That is a matterofof probably individual temperament and character, which method isthe one that you cancan do, what is to yourself the most satisfactorywork, which is the primary reason why the writer writes, is forhimself. I think thatthat all writers wanted to bepoets, maybe, which is the highest form. Then they would accept having failed tobe poets, to write the poetry which was as good asas they wanted itto be, as they dreamed it to be. Then he would take whatever medium is closestto his own nature and character, which could be the stage or could be shortstories or could be novels. I was just wondering, one of your short stories, "A Rose For Emily," what everinspired you to write this story ? That, to me, was another sad and tragic manifestation ofman's condition in which hehe dreams and hopes, in which he is inconflict with himself or with his environment or with others. In this case,there was the young girl, with a young girl's normal aspirations, to find loveand then a husband and a family, who was browbeatenandand kept down by her father, a selfish manwhowho didn't want her to leave home because he wanted a housekeeper,and it was a natural instinct repressed, whichwhich you can't repressit. You can mash it down, but it comes up somewhere else in averylikely a tragic form, and that was simply another manifestationof man's injustice to man, ofof the poor tragic human beingstruggling with its own heart, with others, with its environment, for the simplethings which all human beings want. In that case it was a young girl that justwanted to be loved and to love and to have a husband and a family.And that purely came from your imagination? Well, the story did, but the condition isthere. It exists. I didn't invent that condition. I didn't inventthe fact that young girls dream ofof someone to love and children anda home, but the story of what her own particular tragedy was was invented,yes.Concerning A Fable, which Iin my humbleopinion is your greatest book although the critics didn't seem to think so.What, sir, prompted you to write along those lines, the history of a battlefieldin France during the First World War and the mutinies in the French Armyand That was the only book I ever wrote that came from an intellectual ideapurely and simply. It was the thought occurred to me, who mightthat be under the splendid marble cenotaph with the eternal fire burning over itforever and forever. That ifsuppose that had been Christ. If Christhadhad returned again, of course he would have been crucified again,which would be twice, and maybe, just maybe, man would not be offered but onemore chance. I'm sure that we all thank you[to go on] but I wantedto [give you an opportunity to] no longer be subjected toquestions. I'm sure that we all appreciate Mr. Faulkner's coming and that we'velearned a great deal from his remarks. Thank you, ladies and gentlemen.  [pick up from where he left off thismorning] what I would sort of like to ask you is, after four monthsof contact with students at the University, sort of what you feel in the risinggeneration, whetherwe've heard a lot of talk that they are very much driven toward conformity andsecurity, just the things I think that you probably would oppose in anyone whowanted to be a writer. But I'm thinking more of what you see in the studentsyou've talked to? Tell me that again. I got lost. I'm sorry my sentence was[involved]. What Iwhat I'm thinking of is whatyouwhat you think of the generations of students that you've hadcontact with over the last four months here and possibly a year or soagowell, let's limit it to the United States. Are they moreconventional than they were when theywhen you were their age? Arethey more seeking of conformity? Whatwell, whatare theyless intellectually curious? Are they less daring? No, I would say that they are more intellectually curious. They are moredaring, but they have more pressure to conform. There'sthere's moreand more constant pressure to belong to something, to be submerged into a mass,that they have got togot to struggle with. But I would say that theyarethey are more curious than they were, that they have moreopportunities to be curious, to know, to keep up withwhatwhat cooks, what does go on.But there is thattremendous pressure to conform, which I think they don'tdon't alwaysrealize is there.Well, do you think most of them are resisting it? I would doubt it. I think that all young people resist it, but there's no orderedresistance. They themselves don'tdon't realize how much and how constant thatpressure is or that they would confederate against it. They are given too manythings that take the form ofof bribery to not resist it, to beunaware of it.What sort of bribery? Well, thethe pleasant thingsofofof existence, of being a student, the motor cars, andthe things that make the day-by-day life of astudent simpler than it used to be when there was some question to keep warm inwinter. You had to go to a little trouble to keep a fire going, if nothing else.There wereit was a little more difficult to findpleasure. You couldn't go out and go to the theater by paying sixty or seventycents at the moving-picture show every night. The books were not alwaysavailable. And because things like that are available, the studentisthe young man is tricked into not realizingthe pressure on him to belong to a mass or a group which wants todo his thinking for him, to give him the ideas that that group thatofthe overlords of the group and mass want him to have. But I'm convinced he stillresists it, and it breaks out in all sorts ofof queer andunpredictable places.What are they, sir? Well, I think of young Mr. Plowden-Wardlaw, whose avocation seems to betaking part in a Calypso band, yet suddenly he and his friends on the magazinehere have thought of that issue stating different notions about segregation.That's interesting. He shouldthey should do more with that. Thereshould be more of that in the University, I think, than there is. But that's avery good, a very hopeful symptom.You said something about wishing that the University of Virginia and theState of Virginia would take more leadership in the South. You were asked thatquestion the other night in conversation. Well, yes, that's because of the respectful, almostabject, reverence which the rest of the South has toward the State of Virginiaand toward the University, that when the State of Virginia makes mistakes whichshould have been made not by Virginia but by Mississippi or Alabama, we are alittle ashamed.Do you have any mistakes in mind? Well, the unhappy business of the invitations they sent out for thatdinner, and they found that some of them had gone to Negroes, and they had torecall them, that sort of thing. That's the sort of thing that you expectMississippi to do but not Virginia. To the rest of the South,Virginia must be like Caesar's wife. last week you went to see a play written by one of thestudents here. I would be interested in any comments you would care to make onthe play. Hopeful. It was another instance ofofof thatpressure to conform. I think that a sad and tragic thing, acondition which the young writer today has to face is that themiddle class has been broken down. It no longer exists as a homogeneouscondition recognized by everyone everywhere. It exists, but it exists,asas you might say, individual cells. Thethe best of thewriting of the old daysnot so much done by members of the middleclass, but it was about the tragedies, the problems which existedin the middle class, and now there's no middle class anymore asaa definite condition recognizable everywhereto create those problems, and so the plays have aflavor a little too preciously proletarian, that they are concerned withconditions and not problems of the human heart. Mr. Coffey's play showedait was very hopeful, I think. Itit showed asense ofof his craft, and it was very well done to have been done byamateurs because that was pretty difficult for amateurs to do, that sort ofthing, to make it believable. you say the middle class, but if there is no more middleclass, what do you think has happened to the middle class[when] there was one? Conditions of over-population, the confederation ofthe various labor unions which arearehavetransposed, are transposing what was the proletariat into a new middle class.Iby the middle class having hard and fixed recognizable boundaries, Imean that class which decreed that there should be banks, astable currency. There should be churches. There should be schools. A class inwhich even the ones who couldn't cope financially were still supported by themiddle class. They still belonged to it. Now, that class doesn't exist with therigid boundaries, so that when the ex-member of it,the member of what was the middle class, has failed financially, he issubmerged. He is passed by people who rise through the old middle class withouthaving learned any of the discipline, the responsibility of their class, of amiddle class.Is part of that transition what you recorded in TheTown?  Well, it'swhat everybody writing records. I thinkit'sit definitely is a fact, and every Well, people like the Snopeses always have risenrisenin a country like this where there is freedom in whichto make the best of your capacities.But there was no middle classto give him a checkprobably he couldn't have risen as rapidly as hedid fifty years ago when there was a definite and rigid middle class. I'm interested in something that seems to have happened toyou. It seemed to me, using the Nobel Prize as a mark in time rather than anyspecial significance, that you seem to have moved to a certain extent fromcommunicating only through your works towell, for example, going toJapan or coming to the University of Virginia and going to other places for theState Department. I wondered if this marked any sort of change or departure inyour own thinking, or sort of why you moved out. Well, sir, you are constantly changing. Your skin, your fingernails, isconstantly changing. Thethe only alternative, you know, is death.Andlet's hope that we won't have to keep on doing tomorrow what we are doing today.There wouldn't be much fun in it. Mr. Faulkner? In your talk to the students, you said, as I remember, that it's aquestion whether Southern Baptists are religious, and I was wondering ifyou could elaborate on that and say if they are not religious, thenwhat are they? Well, they're [laughter] Southern Baptist. I think that isanan emotional condition that has nothing to do with God orpolitics or anything else.What is involved in this emotional condition of theSouthernSouthern Baptist? It came fromfrom times of hardship in the South where therewas little or no food for the human spirit, where there were no books, notheater, no music, and life was pretty hard. Ita lot of it happenedout in the sun, for very little reward, and that was the only escape they had. Ithink that is the human spirit aspiring toward something. Ofcourse, it got warped and twisted in the process.Now thisthis condition, do you limit that to Southern Baptistsor do you visualize something larger than actually the Baptist churches in theSouth? Well, I imagine that it exists almost everywhere, though it may takeother forms. It would exist wherever people have been starved, spirituallystarved. one other question, can youhave you gottenanything particularly out of this four months in Charlottesville yourself, andcan you, at this point, in any way distill sort of any feeling you might haveabout Charlottesville and about the University? The writer writes from the three tanks I spoke ofobservation,imagination, and experience. He's got to constantly replenish them and fillthem, and so I couldn't say exactly what I've got frommymy stay here to replenish those tanks, though the tanks have beenreplenished because, asas we agreed, life is in constant flux, inconstant change, and the time that you don't learn something new every day you're dead.Based on your four months here, I was wondering if your opinion ofuniversity education or college education has changed. As I understand, when youfirst came here, you said that a universitya college education wasgood for some people and notnot necessary for others, and I waswondering ifwhether your opinion has been modified at all. No, because I've had that opinion for about fifty years.I think that alleducation in this country has got to be overhauled. I think that there'sait's basically bad whenwhen its premise is that everybodymust be educated willy nilly, that some people don't deserve to be educated, andif everyone is to be educated, unless enough money is spent on education towhere the best student can have the best of the treatment, thebest of the education, then he is going to have to be stultified and held backby a scheme which has got to take the one that is least fitted.Probably the ideal form of education would be one professor to onestudent, or one professor to no more than ten students.Last week you were talking about the cultural interchange through theState Department and wishing more of it could be done and done better. Do youcare to comment on that? I think my opinion is that we go about it the wrong way. We should stoptrying to sell our country to Europe or to anywhere else. We should bring thepeople that don't like our country to this country and let them alone and letthem see what it is about it that makes us like it.Thatit'swewe try to choose a people who arealready our friends and then sell them some illusory picture of America. Let'sbring our enemies here. Wewe can't keep communist spies out of thiscountry anyway. You might just as well bring all the communists that will comehere and let them see what there is about this country that makes us like it,not try to sell them anything. Just let them see a country where everybody has ajob, and he can always hope for a Cadillac. His children can go to the cornerdrugstore andand get an ice cream cone every day, buy all the junkthat Americans love on the installment plan. Mr. Faulkner Do you think the thing that has broken down the middle class ismaterialism? No, it's thethe terrific increase ofpopulation, people that have got to be cared for, that if we had spent as muchattention to breeding people as we do to breeding horses and dogs, we would'vehad a better world probably and stayed out of a lot of trouble.Changing conditions. The machine is responsible for a great deal of it, themachine that has given us more leisure than we have taught ourselves what to dowith.Mr. Faulkner Youyour statements that you think education should beoverhauled, and you said that you thought it would do good toif possible, to havemaybe one professor to one student or one to ten students, and that generally Ibelieve is what colleges are trying to work for. Now, do you think they are onthe right track generally, or do you think they are making some mistakes, and ifso, what mistakes? I'm sure that they are working toward something like that or maybe evena better idea, and I'm convinced, too, that withwithall the problems, the the social problemswhich we face, which is the leisure that we don't know what to do with, with toomany people, with the need for housing, that it's amazing that thecolleges advance as they do. That is, if suddenly things could bestopped to give the colleges one year in which to make their plans, they mightdo something, but now they can't because here's another flux ofofyoung men and women that have got to go to school, and they don't have anychance to stop and get their breath and take stock and make plans.What comparison, if any, can you make really between the Japanesestudents you talked to at Nagano and elsewhere and the ones you've foundhere? I don't think that anyone can understand Japanese, so the impression Igot could be completely wrong, [you see.] The impression I gotis that they arethat their culture is a cultureofofhow to phrase it? Of the functioning oftheof the intellect, not intelligence, but of the intellect,the little clicking ofofof the wheels thatturn and [then just] what it produces don't matter, just sotheall the little wheels are running constantly.You've made a comparison the other night of students, different types ofstudents in Austria, I believe.Isn't that true? Well, sir, I don't remember. I've done a lot of talking in these fourmonths, but you'd have to lookat the taperecorder to remember just what it was.At the University ofit would've been at the University ofVienna? I don't know. Keep on. Maybe I'll remember it. With a group who were studyingto whom you were talking in Englishwere studying for Foreign Service and had definite ideas of what they wanted and so forth. They were much more seriously interested in . I don't know. Can you help us out on that?No, sir. I don't recall that question or that answer. Do you remember any more of it, Mr. [Ranick]? Maybewe'll get to it in a minute.No. IthatI was asking partly trying to find what the answer wasbecause I missed part of it. I was too far back in the room to catch [itall]. I remember you [stated] . in this cultural interchange you speak of, wouldn't thestudent serve as well, the student maybe and his family andthecommunists ?. How would you go about [arranging] something like that? I would import the whole family. Thethe first requirementwould be that be communists. I would bring the whole family intact. I wouldarrange for labor to find aa job for him, a house forhim, and schools for his children. Let them stay two years, and then send themback, and then bring another intact family. Yes, to bring the father and themother andand two or three children and not bother them at all. Just let them seethis country, how it actually is, instead of trying to give themthe false, phony picture which the people that put out ourpropaganda seem to think it is.Do you feel that if you had been born and grown up someplace else, youwould've written pretty much the same kind of book [laid in the environment]there or do you think Mississippi is particularly strong in bringing outthese conditions in the human race? No, no, the imagination would be the same. The observation we would be different and assuming that the experience,the books werewere Russian books or French books, thatwould be a little different.I mean But the people I write about are the same people. People haven't changedthat much. Thethe locale is just incidental. The writer uses thatbecause that's easier.You wouldn't say there's anything significant about No.aboutMississippi beyond No, it's just because it's there. That's easier. If I wrote aboutanother locale, I'd have to do some research or risk somebody saying, "Uh-uh,that's wrong." Do you feel you would have been influenced also probably to write thesame type of thing? Yes, people are the same. People don't change that much. Their problemsare the same problems. you may have touched on this previously, but could you givesome advice to young writers? What advice would you give to young writers? At one time I thought the most important thing was talent. I think nowthat the young man or the young woman must possess or teachhimself, train himself, in infinite patience, which is to try andto try and to try until it comes right. He must train himself in ruthlessintolerance. That is, to throw away anything that is false no matter how much hemight love that page or that paragraph. The most important thing is insight,that is, to beto curiosityto wonder, to mull,and toto muse why it is that man does what he does. Andif you have that, then I don't think the talent makes much difference, whetheryou've got that or not.How would you suggest that he get this insight? Through experience? Yes, and then the greatest part of experience is in the books, to read.To read and to read and to read and to read. To watch people, tohaveto never judge people. To watch people, what they do,withwithwithout intolerance. Simply to learn why it isthey did what they did. I believe earlier you were talking about reading when youwere speaking to the class and [a lot of it was] aboutsymbolism. You said since the writers cannot follow a lot of turns and corners,the symbols, [and must get on with the] writing and that's forthe reader to follow up. I was wondering when you did your reading, did youfollow the turns and the corners inin looking for symbolism? No, I didn't. Thethe reader reads out of the same threereservoirsimagination, observation, and experience that the writerwrites from. Thethe reader and the writer in the same culture havethe same cultural background. That is, the same religious symbols are a partofof both backgrounds, and it'sthe writer, by simpleinstinct, will match those symbols and the old stories of his folklore for thereason that there'rethere're only two or three stories anyone canwrite, and they are bound to repeat themselves. There're only a certain numberof symbols, which are the cultural background, the spiritual background ofanyone, and, of course, they're going to appear when he begins to translate hisown observation and imagination and experience onto paper. He will use the termsof his environment, and a part of his environment is thesymbolism which he inherited, took in with his mother's milk, you might say, asa part of his own past, of the long generationswhichwhich bought him to A.D. 1957, and so it's not surprising thatthey should all be there, and it's not surprising that he, taking them forgranted, doesn't bother to see, "Well, here's where I've used asymbol, and so I got this symbol how many years ago." That's not too important tohim. It's there. have you found any promising young writers during your stayhere, anyone who looks [good] for the future [offiction]? Any promising young writer to me is one that's really working at it. Hispromise will be in the work. Thethe symptom of promiseis that he really is interested enough to accept the anguish andthe frustration and the disappointment andand the final fun andandecstasy of working at it, so any young man that is sincerely working at it andsincerely interested inin the verities ofman's condition shows promise. It may take him years before he lives up to thatpromise, but if he's working at it, that's all the promise he needs to giveanybody.What specifically in your memory did youyou read that helped you more thananything else? Everything I ever read, from the telephone book up and down. Trash. Thegood stuff. All of it.It all And I think that no writer can say just how much influence he had fromwhat source. That is, he might be able to go back over his work and pick outpages or scenes or chapters that showshow a derivation from aspecific source, but then the writer don't do that because by that time he'sbusy writing another book.That he feels atat perfect liberty to takewhatever he needs from whatever source he can find it, just as he is perfectlywilling to let anyone after him take whatever they can get from him with nojealousy whatever, or no feeling that he hashaswhathehe's amoral, not immoral.To return to the idea aboutabout bringing in communists andandletting them live here andand see our way of life, andandnot bother them, andwell, along that ideayou saidthat usuallyyou think they would return with a better picture ofAmerica than they're getting through our propaganda, and I was wondering if youhad anywhat kind of picture do you think they're getting now? It would be a true picture. I think the picture that they get from whatwe export is not a true picture of America because we want to be liked. Wewanted to be thought well of, and despite ourselves, we dress up the image thatwe send abroad, simply because we want to be liked and want to be thought wellof, but that ain't it. It's to let them see themselves what it is in thiscountry that makes us for some strange reason like it.Have you given this enough consideration that you would probably be tempted to write  I reckon the only way I can liveup to that encomium is by going back to Mississippi right away.  There is a ridge; you drive on beyond Seminary Hill andin time you come upon it: a mild unhurried farm road presently mounting tocross the ridge and on to join the main highway leading from Jefferson tothe world. And now, looking back and down, you see all Yoknapatawpha in thedying last of day beneath you. There are stars now, just pricking out as youwatch them among the others already coldly and softly burning; the end ofday is one vast green soundless murmur up the northwest toward the zenith.Yet it is as though light were not being subtracted from earth, drained fromearth backward and upward into that cooling green, but rather had gathered,pooling for an unmoving moment yet, among the low places of the ground sothat ground, earth itself is luminous and only the dense clumps of trees aredark, standing darkly and immobileimmobile out of it. Then, as though at signal, the fireflieslightning-bugsof the Mississippi child's vernacularmyriad and frenetic, random andfrantic, pulsing; not questing, not quiring, but choiring as if they weretiny incessant appeaseless voices, cries, words. And you stand suzerain andsolitary above the whole sum of your life beneath that incessant ephemeralspangling. First is Jefferson, the center, radiating weakly its puny glowinto space; beyond it, enclosing it, spreads the County, tied by thediverging roads to that center as is the rim to the hub by its spokes,yourself detached as God Himself for this moment above the cradle of yournativity and of the men and women who made you, the record and chronicle ofyour native land proffered for your perusal in ring by concentric ring likethe ripples on living water above the dreamless slumber of your past; you topreside unanguished and immune above this miniature of man's passions andhopes and disastersambition and fear and lust and courage and abnegationand pity and honor and sin and pride all bound, precarious and ramshackle,held together by the web, the iron-thin warp and woof of his rapacity butwithal yet dedicated to his dreams. They are all here, supine beneath you, stratified andsuperposed, osseous and durable with the frail dust and the phantomstherich alluvial river-bottom land of old Issetibbeha, the wild Chickasaw king,with his Negro slaves and his sister's son called Doom who murdered his wayto the throne and, legend said (record itself said since there were old menin the county in my own childhood who had actually seen it), stole an entiresteamboat and had it dragged intact eleven miles overland to convert into apalace proper to aggrandise his state; the same fat black rich plantationearth still synonymous of the proud fading white plantation names whetherweI mean of course theyever actually owned a plantation or not: Sutpen andSartoris and Compson and Edmonds and McCaslin and Beauchamp and Grenier andHabersham and Holston and Stevens and De Spain, generals and governors andjudges, soldiers (even if only Cuban lieutenants) and statesmen failed ornot, and simple politicians and over-reachers and just simple failures, whosnatched and grabbed and passed and vanished, name and face and all. Thenthe roadless, almost pathless perpendicular hill-country of McCallum andGowrie and Frazier and Muir translated intact with their pot stills and stillspeaking only the old Gaelic and not much of that, from Culloden toCarolina, then from Carolina to Yokpatawpha still intact and still not speakingmuch of anything except that now they called the pots "kettles" though the drink(even I can remember this) was still usquebaugh; then and last on to whereFrenchman's Bend lay beyond the southeastern horizon, cradle of Varners andant-heap of the northeast crawl of Snopes. And you stand thereyou, the old man, alreadywhite-headed (because it doesn't matter if they call your gray hairspremature because life itself is always premature which is why it aches andanguishes) and pushing forty, only a few years from fortywhile there risesup to you, proffered up to you, the spring darkness, the unsleeping darknesswhich, although isit is of the dark itself, declines the dark since dark is ofthe little death called sleeping. Because look how, even though the last ofwest is no longer green and all of firmament is now one unlidded studdedslow-wheeling arc and the last of earth-pooled visibility has drained away,there still remains one faint diffusion, since everywhere you look about thedark panorama you still see them, faint as whispers: the faint and shapelesslambence of blooming dogwood returning loaned light to light as the phantomsof candles would. And you, the old man, standing there while there risesto you, about you, suffocating you, the spring dark peopled and myriad, twoand two seeking never at all solitude but simply privacy, the privacydecreed and created for them by the spring darkness, the spring weather, thespring which an American poet, a fine one, a woman and so she knows, calledgirls' weather and boys' luck. Which was not the first day at all, not Edenmorning at all because girls' weather and boys' luck is the sum of all thedays: the cup, the bowl proffered once to the lips in youth and then nomore; proffered to quench or sip or drain that lone one time and even thenthatsometimes premature, too soon. Because the tragedy of life is, it must bepremature, inconclusive and inconcludable, in order to be life; it must bebefore itself, in advance of itself, to have been at all.  There's no questions? Not consent, but anxious to do.Anybody likesto stand up in front of a lot of nice people and talk and nobody can say, "Shutup and sit down."  may I ask why in some ofyour writing that you use longsuch long sentences, and almost eliminate punctuation?I have in mind a case in point: the first story inGo Down, Moses, I think you call it "Was."The reason for that is, I think, that every man, every writer has aforeknowledge of death, as everyone does. He realizes that he has only a limitedtime in which to do the work he wants to do. He has found being alive so amazingand so marvelous, that he has got to transcribe it onto paper, to shape it.And he, I think, is trying to tell the whole passion of man's condition,his hopes, his fears, his aspirations in the short time he has to live before hedies, and so by instinct, if he don't watch himself, he tries to put everythinginto one long sentence, like thelike the manthat used to inscribe all of the "Lord's Prayer" on the head of a pin. That he mustdo it while he has breath to do it in.  The pressure is not actually from the publisher. When I first thoughtofof these people and the idea ofof a tribe of people which would come into anotherwise peaceful little southern town likelike ants oror like mold oncheese, thenI discovered then that to tell the story properly would be too manywords to compress into one volume. It had to be two or three. So the pressurehas been on me before I ever told the publisher about itthat I would have tokeep on writing about these people until I got it all told, and I assume thatone more book will do it, though I don't have any great hopes that it will.Mr. Faulkner? Do you write in regular hours or do you write in irregular hours? No, sir. By nature I am completely disorderly. I never have learnedto hang up anything or put anything back where I got it, and so I workwhenwell, as the athlete says, when I'm hot.And I don't like to work. I'm by nature lazy. Iwill put it off as long as I can. Then when I get started it'sit's fun. I thinkthe reason anyone writes is because it's fun, and you like it. That's just yourcup of tea. And so I will write until I have to make myself stop because I'vefound that the only rule for writing I have is to leave it while I'mstill hotwhile I'm still looking good, as Gentlemen PreferBlondes puts itso that I can take up again tomorrow. But I've have never hadany order. Some people are orderly. Theythey lay out a plot or synopsis first.They make notes, which is valid and satisfactory for them but not for me. I wouldbe completely lost. Probably if I'd begun to make a few notes, I could say, "Ohwell, that's all, you don't need to work anymore," and I'd quit.So I think I put off working as long as possibleand do as much of the research and the note-filing up here, and then begin towrite. in your actualcomposition, do you write everything out in longhand or do you type or havesomebody ?I write it out in longhand because I never have learned tothink good onto the typewriter.That I've gottogot to feel the pencil and see the words at the end of the pencil. Then ifit's the wrong word, it's simple enough to scratch it out and try it again. Ireckon I wasstarted writing too soon to have taken the typewriter as anextension of the hands, asas the young man nowadays can do. I have to putputit down on paper first. After that I do the rewriting on the typewriter, butsomething has got to be on paper first for me to look at and get the feel.How fast do you dash it off, sir?  So fast that somebody said my handwriting looks like a caterpillar thatcrawled through an ink well and out on to a piece of paper. If I leave it untiltomorrow, I can't read it myself,so it's gotto be put down quick and then typed quick. how do youadvantage to being pessimistic? Well, I think the writer's aim is not deliberately to bepessimistic. His aim is to show people, human beings in the human condition,faced with the tragedies and the aspirations, the hopes, which all people arefaced with, in the most moving way he can. If his outlook is pessimistic, it'ssimply becausethat is notnot his intention to be pessimistic. It'sit'sbecause having watched people in their confusion and their aspirations thatarewhatwhat he gets is an immediate feeling of pessimism, though the very factthat he keeps on trying to write about people implies that that he has some hopefor man, that he sees man as trying to do better than he does, to be more honestthan he is, to be braver. That the pessimism is a matter of the moment. Maybe thewriter does want to do his bit toward making man better, and maybe hethinks if he shows man in his moments of baseness, it may bebe a lesson tosomeone, either don't do this oror a reminder even when people do do this, atother times they do good things, fine things. That they will do things thatother people shan't suffer. Do you always know how the book's going to come out before you starting writing it? No, sir, I don't. Thethe trick is to get the characters andand workat them until they stand on their own feet and take three dimensions and cast ashadow and begin to move. After that, all the writer has to do is to run alongbehind them with a notebookand put down whatthey say and do, but he himself, or I anyway, don't know where they're going.All I know is that they're alive, and they're in motion, and if I can keep upand write fast enough, I won't miss anything.[Do you expect them to prove]? Only to the point that they are alive, and that the reader will believethat they are alive. They may do things that shock him and outrage him, and thathe doesn't like, butbut my hope is he'll say, "Well, they are alive anyway.They're scoundrels and rascals, but they are alive." That is the hope, Ithink, that any writer hasthat people he creates are credible, that the comedy, thetragedy they run into, the silly things they do are things that arearewithin the scope ofof a human being to do. Yes, siryes, ma'am. when you wrote The Sound and theFury, why did you suddenly switch from the first person ? That book began asas so many books do withwith an anecdote, a picture.The picture was of both children who had been sent from the house. They didn'tknow why. Something was taking place in the house, in the parlor, and likechildren, they were curious to know what it was, and the only one that was braveenough to climb the tree was the little girl, and the book grew from that. Itstarted off to be a simple short story. I wrote the first section, which wasthe idiot brother's. I realized that that wasn't enough. I hadn't told thatstory. So I let another brother try to tell it. That's the second section. Irealized that still wasn't enough. I hadn't told that story, so I let the secondbrother try, which was the third section. That still wasn't enough, so then I hadFaulkner try it.Andand still it was notenough. I still [haven't] told the story to suit me. That's thereason that to me is the one I love the dearest, that I'm the most fond of,because that was the most splendid failure, and I still haven't told that story.I believe that if I had it to do over, I could do it better. Of course Iwouldn't. But that's the one book I wish I hadn't written, so I could write itnow.  you've spoken frequently [I believeabout] various ways that you've failed, giving us the impression that youyou never feel as if you've quite expressed yourself.Is it [really so hard]? That's right. I think that's true of any writer. That's why he writesanother book. If he wrote the book that pleased him absolutely, that was perfectby his own standards, then nothing remains [but to cut his throat], but thatbook fails so he writes another one. He believes that the next one won't fail.Of course it will. Which is good for him because that keeps him working, and Ithink that no life is as happy asas a life in which you've tried to makesomething which wasn't here beforea picture or a symphony or a book or a pieceof sculpture, and that is to me the best life of all. Not a happy life, becauseit's filled withwith anger, frustration, because it's not perfectof rage andexhaustion, but it'sit's really a matchless life. Iwouldn't put any other occupation above it. I think thata man that can deda young man, young woman, who can dedicate himself or herselfto that simple idea, to make something which didn't exist before.It is the bestlife .Mr. Faulkner? May I ask how much your daily variations of mood affect the actions ofyour characters? Suppose one day you get up feeling fine, do your characters seemto take on a cheerful aspect?  I don't believe so. I think that anyone, the painter, themusician, the writer works in a kind of anan insane fury. He's demon-driven. Hecan get up feeling rotten, with a hangover, or withwith actual pain, andand if he gets to work, the first thing he knows, he don't remember that pain, thathangoverhe's too busy. That his feelingI doubt if that reflects too muchin his work. That he can wake up and go to work feeling good, and the firstthing he knows, he doesn't remember whether he feels good or nothe's too busy.That he is in thein the clutch of a demon then. does that mean that he alsoimpervious to atmosphere ? No, no. I think the writer, any artist, is completely amoral.He'srobs and steals everywhere he can find anything he might need. Theatmosphere, he hashe's gathered up from observation, from experience, just fromliving and breathing. He stole that away and then when he needs it, to put intowhat he writes, he hunts around in his trash bin or his lumber room and picksout the atmosphere or the symbolism or the style, whatever he needs, but hehashas acquired that long before he sits down to write. At the time he'swriting, he's like the carpenter building a fence or a chicken coop, that he'sbusy sawing planks and driving nailsthat he has already got his supply ofnails and his boards at hand, where he can reach back into his workshop and getwhat plank or what size nails he needs. As far as I know, they do, because the friends I have areare notliterary friends. They are people engaged in other pursuits, and unless I'm asgood in their pursuits as they are, they have, of course, a low opinion of me.If I'm as good inin their pursuits, that is, farming or hunting or with horsesas they are, then they have a high opinion of me, which has nothing to do with mybooks because they don't read my books. Some artist said that nobody in Mississippi reads; they're allwriting. I want to ask you a question aboutThe Town. Thethe heroine of this story, Eula VarnerSnopes, at the end commits suicide. What do you think was her reason for it? It was for the sake of that child. She, at that time had realizedthat every child, a young girl, especially, needed the semblance ofan intact homethat is, to have a mother and a father, to have the same thingsthat the other children had. And she had reached an impasse wherewhere herherlover would have demanded that she leave herher husband, and then thatchild would have found out that it had grown up in a broken home. Up tothis time, whether the child loved Flem or not, at least he was the symbol ofthe father which all the other children had, and withthe mother felt it wouldbe better for this girl to have a mother who committed suicide than a motherwho ran off with a lover, which wasthat may have been the wrong decision shemade, but that was the decision she did makethat at least this girlwould'vewould've had the similitude of an intact, though atragedytragedy-ridden home, just as other children did.Do you by chance have in mind writing the story of this daughter now? Yes sir. That will be in thein the next book. She's one of the mostinteresting people I've written about yet, I think. Her story will be in thenext book.  how do you feel about the use of symbols. That seems to be quitethe rage now. Do you consciously use symbols in your writing? Not deliberately. Thethe symbolism is a part of anyone's past. ByI meanby that his environment, his background, his experience, his observation. And apart of that background is the Christian religion. The writer is engagedprimarily inin writing about people. He's doing this in the most moving and most effective way he knows, and the symbolism, like the style, they are thenails and the boards inin the carpenter's workshop, and these symbols appearalmost by coincidence in what he does. He's simply writing out of his ownbackground of observation and experiencethat he hasn't got time to say, "Now,I'm going to use a symbol." He's too busy writing about simple men and womenengaged inin the tragedy of man's condition, engaged in the conflict with thehuman heart or with its fellows or with its environment, its background, and Ithink that the reader must read any book from the same background which thewriter writes it from, that is from the background of observation, experienceand imagination, and so the reader reads into the book, finds in the booksymbolism which the writer didn't know was there and is not really interested infinding there. He was too busy, but he doesn't doubt that thatsymbolsymbolism is there or, even [if it were not, what]symbolism is there could be translated into someone else's understanding andcomprehension. That is, a Chinese could probably find Chinese symbolism in anAmerican book, just as the American can find American symbolism in a Chinese or aJapanese book.Mr. Faulkner Yes'm.[I heard of your] article in Ebony magazine giving advice to the coloredpeople as to the way they should act toward integration. What was youradvice and do you think that they are heeding it in any way? I would like to think that some do. The advice was simply that nolaw or edict passed by no matter whom is going to change the social conditionuntil the people involved in that condition wish it changed. That is, if theNegro were given equality by a police force, he would keep that equality only aslong as the police stood there. When the police were gone, then someone smarteror more [ruthless] would take it away from them againthat hehas got to earn that equality. He has got to learn, as everybody must,that liberty and freedomis not a condition like rainfall or sunshine orbeing too cold or being too hot. That's a condition that one mustmust work togain and then work to hold, that to keep equality and freedom, you mustlearn the responsibility of equality and freedom, that nobody can have thefreedom given him by the police until he's willing to deserve it and thenwork to keep it, which is to be responsible for it. And I do hope that somepeople in the Negro race read it and believed in it andand will take heed to it,since it's a problem which has got to be solved, as wewe can'tcan't deport thewhole Negro race. He's a part of our country now, andand we must all, the white manand the Negro, too, must work together to make his condition bearable.Otherwise, it'sit's like having seventeen million mules running loose in thecountry.  [It seems you have placed the Negro in an inferior position] I have not placed him in an inferior position. It's thethewhole white race and white economy has placed him in an inferior positioneconomically and educationally, because inin that position, the white man'srevenues from his economy will be a little higher. It's notthat the Negrowe don't know whether the Negro is inferior to the white man or not. He's had no chance [to be anything else].But Ias I see it, he must have the chanceto prove whether he is inferior or not, that he is not goingto be content any longer to be inferior. I mean, artificiallyinferior. He's got to have the chance to prove that he is equal[orincapable of it].And it's better tofor the white man to give him thatchance than to have that chance foisted on the white man [bylaw].[ the stateof the Negro was forced upon him by law, was it not?]. Well, sir, I would say by custom, and then, of course, all our law is orusually isit speaks after the fact. The law simply makes legal what has been acustom. The law don't change  what he means and probably any story thatcan't be told in one sentence or at least one paragraph is not worth writing.Thethe revision, the cutting outin my owncase, I'm lazy. I don't like to work, and so I will do as much of it as possibleinin the mind, in thinking, before I undertake the arduous, hatefuljob of swatting it out on paper. I think the revision quite often followsbecause when the job is down on paper at last, it still is not quite what itshould be, and so youyouyou change, you revise, you edit,youyou try to bring it closest to the ideal of perfection, which, ofcourse, you're not going to reach either. That is, what I'm trying to say, isthat the revision is I think for the writer more thanthan theeditor's revision, which is for the reader.Yes.Do you work, so to speak, eight hours a day at a desk and justconcentrate on it all day long, or do you just sort of let it come to you andwork spasmodically? Oh, I think that the writer never quits working. All thetime he's awake, in, as I say, in my own case, I put off the actual work as longas possible, but probably all the time I'm awake I'm thinking about theparticular job I'm at at the time, and I work at it only when I have to. Theonly rule I have is to quit while it's still hot. Never write yourself out.Always quit when it's going good. Then it's easier to take it upagain. If you exhaust yourself, then you'll get into a dead spell,and you have trouble with it. It'swhat's the saying, Leavethem while you're looking good. Did you have a question, [Thomas]?Yes.I'm particularly interested in your style, and I wouldlike to know have you developed it consciously and has it changed very muchsince when you first began to write? I did not develop it. I think style is one of the tools of the craft,and I think anyone that spends too much of his time about hisstyle, developing a style, or following a style, probably hasn't got much tosay and knows it and is afraid of it, and so he writes a style, amarvelous trove. He becomes Walter Pater, which is beautiful, but there ain'ttoo much in it.I think style is simply one ofthe tools of the craft. Thatthatthe story you're telling commandsits style, that one style is good for now and another style will be good fortomorrow.Andand like the good carpenter, one shouldshouldbe able towell, you might say almost imitate, that there's somethings that certain men havewomen writers have told betterthan others have, which is a good tool to use if you're trying togive the same effect that that man or woman [gave], but thestyle is incidental, I think.In other words, it's intuitive? That's right, yes. That the story commands its style andin a way, creates its style. But you're writing primarily about people. do you think that a writer can teach young writers? I don't think anybody can teach anybody anything.I think that you learn it, butbut theyoung writer that is, as I say, demon-driven andand wants to learnand hashas got to write, he don't know why, he will learnfromfrom almost any source that he finds. He will learn from olderpeople who are not writers, he will learn from writers, but he learns it. Youcan't teach it. Then I think, too, that thethat the writer who'sactually hot to say something hasn't got time to be taught. He's too busylearning. He knows what he wants. His instinct says to take this from this manor that from that man, but he's nothe hasn't got time to sit under amentor and listen to try to learn. to get back to the business of style for just a minute. Youmentioned in some class that I attended that Dostoevsky and Conrad were twopeople you read a good deal when you were eighteen and nineteen years old. Wouldyou say that you had gotten something in the way of arrangement of words fromConrad? Every now and then in your storiesI was thinking of a coupleof passages in "The Bear," passages here and there in otherstoriesthere are arrangements of cadence, rhythm, that seems to me tobe rather like Conrad. I'm thinking of a passage in "Youth," an arrangement ofadjectives, "resplendent yet somber, full of danger, yet promising." It's thedescription of the East when that young boy comes upon it. There's something ofthe same kind of use of those kind ofkind of heavy arrangement ofadjectives I've noticed in your writing. Does that seem fair? Quite true. I got quite a lot from Conrad, and I got quite a lot from aman that probably you gentlemen, young people, never heard of, a man calledThomas Beer. Youyou probably know the name.I know the name Thomas Beer in connection with a critical work. Did hewrite The Mauve Decade? He wrote theyes.Yes, that's how I got to And I got quite a lot from him. It was to me a good tool, agoodgood method, a good usageusage of words, approachto an incident. I think the writer, as I've said before, iscompletely amoral. He takes whatever he needs, wherever he needs, and he doesthat openly and honestly because he himself hopes that what he does will be goodenough so that after him people will take from him, and they are welcome to takefrom him, as he feels that he would be welcome by the best of his predecessorsto take what they had done.  do you think the writer is asking for trouble if heattempts to write of things beyond his personal experience? No, sir, I do not. I do not. There should be no limits to what thewriter tries to write about. He has got to tell it in terms that he does know.That is, he can write about what is beyond his experience, but the only terms hedoes know are within his experience, his observation.But thereshould be no limits to what he attempts. Thethe higher the aim, thebetter. If [he wants] to be a failure, [well]let him be a fine bust, not just a petty little one.Sir, back to your writing,often it seemed to me that you[choose] questions and then answer them yourself as youdevelop your story, rather than letting the reader answer them, letting them togo unanswered. Is that a lack of confidence in your reading audience or merely atrick of style? Itit's not a conscious trick, and I'm sorry thatthat word occurred to anyone about it. Itit's thethe desire to exhaust completely the human characterwhich one is trying to create, to probe and to probe and to probe, to never bequite satisfied. The man with judgment will have enough of it that after he hasprobed and probed to get the absolute essence, to have the tasteand the judgment to edit it then, to throw away a lot of it, but sometimes hedoesn't always do that. It may be lack of taste. It may be his hurry. It may bethat he himself thinks that this is necessary so that who reads it can followhim, that he has probed and probed and probed to get to the absolute bottom ofthe character he's trying to create. I don't believe that I'veever used that as a trick. I may have. It'sit's hard to say. As Isay, the writer is amoral about other people's work and quite often abouthimself. He is a congenital liar or he wouldn't be a writer,and maybe he can't tell the truth aboutanything. This is sort of long question. In last week's issue of the New York Times Book Review, Colin Wilson discussed thegreatmakings of a great writer, and he said writers today are of twokinds, what he termed telescopic and microscopic, the telescopic writerbeing one that gives a bird's eye, an extended view of nature, and themicroscopic writer being one who examines the life of ordinary people. He wenton to say that a great writer combines these two qualities and examines himselfat the same time, and finally, he said that your writing and that of Dos Passos,Williams and Miller were all microscopic, and, he went on to say, third rate.My question is do you agree with his statements of themakings of a great writer and if not, what do you think makes a greatwriter? I think the question about telescopic writing andmicroscopic writing, that's a literary question and is in Mr. Wilson'sprovenance, but probably not in the provenance of a writer, unless that writeris also literary. I don't think that you have to be literary justto be a writer.I want to set the record straight. I don't think you quoted him quiteexactly, Joseph. I think he said people who imitated those writings werethird-rate writers. I think that Colin Wilson seems a very brash person, but Idon't think he's inclined to be that brash, do you? No. I think it's theimitators he's thinking of. Well, that isresembles something that we just spoke about, isthat someone who hasn't got anything to say, he knows, if he hasthe desire to write, will imitate for the sake of imitation. Hewill think, Hemingway has written good books, so I'll write likeHemingway, which is the third-rate writer in the sense that he hasn't gottensomething first-rate to say and probably never will have. Actually, I thought atone time that what one needed to write with is talent, but Ithink now it's probably patience to probe and to try and to probeand to try, then ruthlessness to discard what is not necessary orwhat is trashy, but mostly what you need is insight which is the probing, thatyou don't need to have a telescopic eye nor a microscopic eye.It'sit's insight, the desire to see why man does what he does.Mr. Faulkner In doing that, do you find that you've done it yourself? Oh, yes. That'sthat's like we spoke ofof one hasgot toto write in the terms that he knows which is his ownenvironment, andand man's closest environment ishishimself. That he has got to measure everything against what hebelieves and feels to be true. Now, his belief hashas come fromobservation, from experience, from what he has read, mostly a lot from what he'sread, but heyes, he's got to measure everything against what hehimself believes, not thinks up here, but believes here to bebe true,and be moving.  a lot of people have said that your novels and shortstories contain many hidden meanings and subtle symbolisms and things like that.Do you find that they more or less, as youas you write, do they all fit somepreconceived design of yours, or the symbolism or the hidden meanings more orless develop as you write, or do you find that people sometimes read more intoyour stories than you yourself originally intended for them to read? I wouldn't say that they do. Theythey read into my storieslots of things which I myself didn't know were there, but I'm sure that they'requite right when they can find symbolism. Thethe symbolism,the pattern of symbolism is a part ofof the man, theindividual, too, and he's still writing in terms of his environment, and that'spart of his environment. Thethe religious symbolism,the mythological symbolism, the rest of it is all that he hasrobbed and reft and stolen, as he read and grew up andlistened, and he's still writing in the terms which he knows because itsimplifies things.  could you tell me what do you think that Conrad was tryingto say or what [he] means to you as an author? Yes. What they all mean to me is to write about man inconflict with himself, his own heart, or with his fellows or with hisenvironment. I think that the writer that is trying to deliversome sociological or some topical message is inretrograde toward the second rate, that primarily the writer is writing aboutpeople in conflict and the social message is incidental. The social message ispart of the environment, which he uses as a tool. Sir, speaking of symbolism, in your story "That Evening Sun," why did youname that fellow Jesus? That was probably a deliberate intent to shock just a little. That'sait's a valid name among Negroes inin Mississippi. Thatis, you don't see it too often, but it'sit's nothing unusual.It'snot uncommon.But there may have been a little, not so much to shock but toemphasize the point I was making, which was that thisthis Negro womanwho had given devotion to the white family knew that whenwhen thecris of her need came, the white family wouldn't be there. How serious were you in the preface to Sanctuarywhen you said that you were writing forto the reader instead foryourself as you had in your other books? Well, that's a long story. I wrote Sanctuary. Ineeded money badly at that time, and so I thought of the most horrific story Icould and wrote it. I sent it to the publisher, and he said, "Good God, we can'tprint this. We'd both be in a jail."And I wasglad of it, because by that time, I had got a job and didn't need the money, andI wrote two other books. They were printed, and then one day I got the galleyfor Sanctuary, and I looked at it, and I didn't need themoney by that time, and it was a base, shoddy, shabby job, and so Iwrote the publisher to throw the whole thing out, that wewouldn't print it, and hehe wrote me back that plates had been made.He didn't have much money at that time either. He had money invested in this, and something must be done, and I said, "Well,I'll rewrite it then and make itdo the best I can to make it adecent, honest book." And he said, "Well, all right. I'll agree to that, and I'llpay half the cost of the new plates, and you pay half." So I had to get anotherjob to earn the two hundred and seventy dollars to pay my share of the newplates, and I rewrote the book and did the best I could with it, to makeitmake it an honest book, and I was still ashamed of that firstattempt because that was the only time I ever betrayedwell, call itthe muse, you might say, and I was so ashamed of it and when I wrotethat preface, I still didn't like the book, and I still am sorrythat I wrote the first version of it, and that was the reason for thepreface.When did you first realize that you wanted to write, sir? I think I had scribbled all my life, ever since I learned to read. Iwrote poetry when I was a young man, until I found that Ithat it wasbad poetry, would never be first rate poetry. And I wasI was in NewOrleans. I worked for a bootlegger. This was in '20'21, '22, '23. I rana launch from New Orleans across Pontchartrain down in the Industrial Canal, outinto the Gulf where the schooner from Cuba would bring the raw alcohol and buryit on a sand-spit, and we'd dig it up and bring it back to the bootlegger andand his mother,she wasshe was an Italian. She was a nicelittle old lady, andand she was the expert. She would turn itinto scotch with a little creosoteand bourbon. We had the labels, the bottles, everything. It wasquite aquite a business. And I met Sherwood Anderson. He was livingthere, and I liked him right off, and we wouldwe got along finetogether. We would meet in the evenings, in the afternoons.We'd walk, and he'dtalk, and I'd listen. We'd meet in the evenings, and we'd go to a drinking placeand we'd sit around till one or two o'clock drinking, and still me listening andhim talking. Then in the morning he would be in seclusion working, and the nexttime I'd see him, the same thing, we would spend the afternoon and eveningtogether, the next morning he'd be working. And I thought then, if that was thelife it took to be a writer, that was the life for me.Soso I wrote a book, and when I started, I foundthat writing was fun, and I hadn't seen Mr. Anderson in some time, till I metMrs. Anderson on the street. She said, "We haven't seen you in a long time.What's wrong?" I said, "I'm writing a book." And she said, "Do you want Sherwoodto look at it?" And I said, "No'm, it's not finished yet." I hadn't thought ofanybody looking at it. It was fun to write the book. And I saw her later, andshe said, "I told Sherwood you were writing a book, and he said, 'Good God.'Then he saidthat hehe willmake a trade with you. If he don't have to read it, he will tell his publisherto take it." I said, "Done."And so that washow my first book got published, and by that time I'd found that writing wasfun. I liked it.That was my cup of tea, and I've been at it ever since and willprobably stick at it. Sir, what gave you the idea for your short story "Mountain Victory"? ItI believe, as I remember, that came from theidea of thelet me see. I believe it was the idea of theirreconcilable difference between two men of more or the less the samebackground, the eastern Tennessee mountain man who was asoutherner too, and the descendant of a slave-owning aristocracy tomeet in those conditions never to bebe kin, yet never to touch. In away, both victims of the war. Probably that's what it came from. I don'tremember. I was still writing about people and as I recall, thatwouldmight've been. I just don't know. so muchso much of your material seems to be connected. Is thereany way you determine what is short story material and what is novelmaterial? No, the story itself does that. I never know myself whichit's going to be. The Sound and the Fury I thought was going to be a shortstory. I think it would take a much better craftsman than I am, a more trainedcraftsman, maybe a more literary craftsman to know beforehand what form thematerial wants to take. I'm simply writing about people that I beginwhen I can and stop as soon as I can.I remember asking you a question the other day about two stories, onecalled "Two Soldiers," a story that I like very much and some of the people inmy class have read, and what I consider a sequel to that story called "The CountryWillShe Shall Survive." I think that's it's it or Oh, "Shall Not Perish.""Shall Not Perish." That's it. It seems to me that there's a differencebetween the two stories in a way. The first story I can read over and overagain with a great deal of pleasure and interest. The second story seems to meto be something of a dead thing in comparison to the first, and I think youstarted to tell me the other day when I was speaking of it, the first story hadto do with people's character, and the second story really had to do with anidea. That's right. Thethe first story had to do with one of themost interesting of all conflicts, all human conflicts. To me,it'sit's the boy trying to reconcile, tolearn in order to accept the adult world he will have to cope with, and Ibelieved more in the story about the little boy and his brotherwho got drafted than I believed in thein the idea that I tried tomake into another story, the sequel to it.Do you feel that's why the second story may not seem as That's right. That I'm simply not an idea man.Yes. [As] I'm notnot really interested enough in ideas to take even myown too seriously.   from what viewpoint did you write theyou writethe story fromI believe it was from TheseThirteenit was called "Carcassonne" or "Carcassonne"? That wasI was still writing about a young man inconflict with his environment. Iit seemed to me thatfantasy was the best way to tell that story. To have told it in termsofof simple realism would have lost something, in my opinion. To usefantasy was the best, and that's a piece that I'vealways liked because there was the poet again. Iwanted to be a poet, and I think of myself now as a failed poet, notas a novelist at all, but a failed poet who had to take up what he coulddo. Sir, in connection with that, there's an old French poem by the name of"Carcassonne." I forget the author. It has pretty much the general, the samesort of theme. I wonder if that was in your mind at the time. I don't know the poem, though if I did know it, and I hadneeded to steal from it, I'm sure I would. I wouldn't have hesitated. What do you mean,in your story, "All the Dead Pilots,"and I believe a story called "Honor," in which you givethe impression that those people who fought in the war, after those experiencesof war, will be dead the rest of their lives? Well, in ain a way they were. That the onesthat even continued to live very long were the exceptions, andthe one among them that coped with the change of timeoryou can count them on your thumbs almost. Rickenbacker's one, butthere are not too many others. Bishop, he finally drank himself to death, diedlast year, and the others, Victor Yeats didn't live ten years. But then in a waytheytheythey were dead, they had exhausted themselves psychically,whatever it was, but anyway, they were unfitted for the world that they foundafterwards. Not that they rejected, they simply were unfitted.They had wornthemselves out.You'd restrict that feeling to people who had been in aviation, not withpeople who had served in other branches of the armed services? At that time, yes, because there was more concentration of beingfrightened of flying then than in infantry oror ground troops. Youjust gotgot scared worse quicker and more oftenYes. Flying than you did on the ground. You seem to distinguish between literary men andand writingmen. I was wondering if you would elaborate on that. Are not the tworeconcilable? Cannot they be? Yes, I think I said that some writing men areliterary men, but I don't think that you have to be a literary manto be a writer. I think that to be a literary man infers acertain amount ofof, well, even formal education, and there are somewriters that have never had formal education. Of course, you can be literarywithout the formal education, but I'veI've got to talk in terms ofwhat I know about Faulkner now, you see, and Sherwood Anderson, that we were notliterary men in the sense that Edmund Wilson is a literary man orMalcolm Cowley, for instance.Mr. Faulkner Sorry. what short-story writers at the present time do you findinteresting people from the point of view of theirof their stories, something thatpeople might read with profit? May I have that again?What short story writers do you admire at the present time? Now, that's a difficult question for me because I think not of writersbut of the characters. I remember the characters they wrote about without beingable to remember always justjust who wrote thewrote thepiece. But when I was a young man, Thomas Beer that I mentioned, heinfluenced me a lot. Chekhov. [I can't] think of some of theothers.What about the present writers in your area of the country, a writer likeEudora Welty? Well, I think again ofof the books rather than thewriter.Yes. I think of a book of hers called The RobberBridegroom, which was quite different from any of the other things shehas done, which to me was the worthwhile one. Ithink ofof stories ofof Hemingway. I wouldn't say that Ilike all of Hemingway, but I remember stories of his that haven'tbeen matched in my time, though I can think ofof people that havewritten betterbetter pages, better paragraphs than Hemingway. I canthink ofof stories ofof Erskine Caldwell. I have alwaysrated Thomas Wolfe first among my lot because ofof the failure, thesplendor of his failure as compared to the not quite splendor ofofour failures, but I would never read Wolfe again. It wouldit's stillaa magnificent failure, but I would never read it again and I remembervery little of what I did read from Wolfe, but I remember characters fromHemingway. I remember characters from Caldwell, but not from Wolfe.Did you want to ask a question, ?What importance do you attach to the titles of your stories and books,and how do you go about selecting them? I think a title is extremely important to a book, and I thinkthat a gift for choosing titles is amark of genius.I think thatBalzac, thethe way he chose titles, that was genius, and I'vebeenbeen quite lucky in the titles I've chosen, but some of them havebeen wrong.Butbut most of them have been pretty good titles, Ithink.  when you set out to write a book, do you usually know howyou're going to reconcile your characters in the end or how the plot is going towork out or do you let this work itself out for itself as you go along? After about the third or fourth page, the characters take charge of thatbook. They write the rest of it. They just tell me what to put down.Mr. , you had a question.It was almost the same question, but what happensdo you ever feel the characters [particularly] onedo you feel anecessity to give every character .[do you] tell all the truth about that character that you feelneeds to be told regardless of whether ? No, I think that after about ten books, I had learnedenough ofof judgment to where I could pick and choosethe facet of a character which I need at that particular timeto move the story I was telling, so that I cancan take a facet of onecharacter in one story andand another facet of that character inanother story. To me, it's the same character, though sometimes to the readerit may seem as though the character had changed or had developedmore. To me, he hasn't. That I used my editorial prerogative of choosing what Ineeded from that particular character at that particular time.In light of that, when you think about the failure of Thomas Wolfe, doyou feel that there is any connection withthe necessity,the wayyou feel about how characters ? If I understand it right, I'm sure that Wolfe felt the same way that Idid about his editorial right to choose what he wanted from thecharacter in order to tell what he was trying to tell. Toto me, whatI mean by the splendor of Wolfe's failure is thatevery man willwill live only a short time, his biblical three scoreand ten. He knows that, that in time, soon, very soon or comparably, he will begone, finished and done, and his only chance is a very limitedonelimited one in which to express all living or [earth]anguish or hope, aspiration has meant to him is in the short space he will have,and he is in a way trying to write the whole history of the humanheart on the head of a pin. He'll have only one shot at it, and that's what Imean by the splendor of Wolfe's failure, that he tried hardest, with the mostcourage, to put the whole history of man's heart on the head of the pin.[And that was your ambition] Yes. how much do you feel that the writer's being involved withpeople in his writing is dependent upon his being actively involved with realpeople in the real world? I think that has nothing to do with the writing. That he can be involvedwith people, he can be involved with alcohol, or with gambling or anything, andit's not going to affect the writer. Now, I have no patience, and I don't holdwith the mute inglorious Miltons. I think if he's demon-driven withsomething to be said, then he's going to write it. He cancan blamehisthe fact that he's not turning out the work on lots of things.I've heard people say, "Well, if I were not married andand hadchildren, I would be a writer." I've heard people say, "If I could just stop doingthis, I would be a writer." I don't believe that. I think if you're going towrite, you're going to write, and nothing will stop you. That you can beinvolved, and probably the more you're involved, it may be better for you. Thatmaybe it'sit's bad to crawl off into the ivory tower andstay there, that maybe you do need to be involved, to get the edges beaten offof you a little every day may be good for the writer.Mr. Faulkner In the story "Red Leaves," the slave escapes from his Indian captors andgoes and hides in the swamp and, in order to avert his capture, has thecottonmouth strike him in the arm. Then the Indians come and capture him anyway.And why did this happen in the story? Is this to show that man can't escape hiscondition or? No, that wasthe snake episode was to showto showthat man, when he knows he's going to die, thinks that he canaccept death, but he doesn't, he doesn't, really. The Negro at the time,hehe said I'm already dead, it doesn't matter, the snake can bite mebecause I'm already dead, but yet at the end, he still wanted to putoffthat man will cling to life, that in a preferencebetween grief and nothing, man will take grief always.   in the next to last chapter of Light inAugust, you have the scene where Hightower is considering many things, past life, in particular, and there is the visionthat he sees of the dead face of the dead Christmas, and as he sees it,[it] begins struggling trying to resolve itself into adifferent focus, and while I think I know what that scene means to me, would you careto comment on your meaning there? Yes, he was a man of God who hadhad failed always. He,inhis belief was, that he had failed his wife, that ifhe had been different, his wife wouldn't have gone bad, that herewas a time when a man of courage would've saved this man, and he,the man of God, failed again, and so he resorted into fantasy to dreamwhenwhen some Hightower was brave and gallant and courageous.That itwas escape, that he hated himself.I have often wondered, did you mean in that scene that [he isapproaching death]. [Is he suffering] a heart attack therethat he is dying in that chapter? No. No, he wished he could die. No, he didn't. He would have to suffer alittle longer than that. Many writers beginning to write, usually in their first work, make one oftheir characters, usually the hero, an image of himself. Now, I don't find thistrue inin your writings at all. But may I ask you, do you ever find yourselfidentifying with one of your characters, and have to resist, for instance,someone like Gavin Stevens or just [for the moment say]the old man in the last pages of A Fablewho comes out of the crowd? I don't know whether anyone could say, any writer could say, just howmuch he identifies himself with his characters. Quite often the young man willwrite about himself simply because himself is what he knows best. That he isusing himself as the standard of measure, and to simplify things, he writesabout himself asperhaps as he presumes himself to be, maybe as he hopes himself tobe, or maybe as he hates himself for being. Though after that, themorethe more you write, the more youyou seeyou have to write, the more you have learned by writing, and probably you don'treally have time to identify yourself with a character, except at certainmoments when the character is in a position to express truthfullythings which you yourself believe to be true. Then you'll put your own ideas inhis mouth, but theywhen you do that, they'll become his. I think thatyou're not trying to preach through the character, that you're toobusy writing about people. It just happens that this man agrees with you on thisparticular point, and so he says it.  you seem to say that a writer should write ofthe heart, and I'm assuming that alsothis is anassumptionthat you believe that a writer should write from the heart.Now as opposed to writing from theof the heart, there's writing ofthe glands, which you've mentioned before. May a writer successfully write fromthe glands rather than from the heart? He can successfully do it, likewhat's his name? Spillane?and the toughs theme.But it's notit'snot good writing. It's not worth doing, in my opinion. It's successful, but itain't worth doing.Iwhat I meant, towrite from the heart is, it'sit's the heart that hasthe the desire to be better than man is, thethe up herecan know the distinction between good and evil, but it's the heartthat makes you want to be better than you are. That's what I mean by to write itfrom the heart. That it's the heart that makes you want to bebrave when you are afraid that you might be a coward, that wantsyouwants you to be generous, or wants you to becompassionate when you think that maybe you won't. I think thatthe intellect, it might say, "Well, which is the most profitable? Shall I becompassionate or shall I be uncompassionate? Which is most profitable? Which isthe most profitable? Shall I be brave or not?" But the heart wants always to bebetter than man is. Was the "Rose for Emily" an idea or a character? Just how did you goabout that? That came from afrom a picture of the strand of hair on thepillow. It was a ghost story. Simply a picture of a strand of hair on the pillowin the abandoned house. you seem to find the easiest message for writing as a kindof easy first-person with his message or something of that sort. You're alwaysthere in your stories, is my hunch. Yes.That's the easiest, simplest method of doing it. Yes.Is that how you started out in your first stories, from that point ofview? No. I was still trying to talk about people in the simplestway I could think of, and I myself probably never did decide, Now shall this betold in the first person or the third person or how. I was simply talkingabouttrying to tell about people, trying to create a manwhich would have the solidity ofof a living man, that is, would becapable of anguish andand courage and compassion or baseness, behuman, so that he too would throw a shadow behind him, not a transparency, thatthe others are just a matter of which tool to use.It'sit's notnot too important.  you say you're interested in, and have been throughout yourwriting, in people rather than ideas. I'm just wondering, as you were sayingthat, about, for example a book like the Fable, at whatpoint did the allegorydid you become conscious of it? Obviously youdidn't take the idea and impose it, I gather from what you say. What got youinto the Fable, whatwhat That was tour de force. Itthe notion occurred to me one dayin 1940'42, shortly after Pearl Harbor and the beginning of thelast great war. Supposewho might that unknown soldier be? Suppose that had beenChrist again, under that fine big cenotaph with the eternal flame burning on it?That he would naturally have got crucified again, and I hadtothen it became tour de force, because I had to invent enough stuffto carry this notion.You were writing from an idea then? That's right, that was an idea, and a hope thatan unexpressed thoughtthat Christ had appeared twice, had been crucified twice, and maybe we'd haveonly one more chance. Yes.[As you started][had you ever read a book called]The Paths of Glory? Yes. Well, that washis book, too, was based on an actual instancein the French records. There was a regiment that refused, andalso that book, I did usewhen it became tour de force, Ihad to use all the symbolism I could think of, and I was using thetrinity ofof man'sof man's spirit, the one,thethe young British pilot who said, "This is evil. I won't accept it.I will decline the world before I will accept it." The old general who said, "Thisis evil, but we can bear it." The runner who said, "This is evil, I'm going to dosomething about it."They haveanyone have any one more question you want to askbecause we'll have to stop pretty soon. We got classes coming on. Anybody wantto ask a question?thank you very much for coming into thisclassroom. It's been very nice indeed having you. Thank you. Thank you, gentlemen. change the Negro's condition, that the Negro's condition wasgradually being changed by theby the white man. He was being givenmore and more of liberty, more and more of equality. That Supreme Court decision,in Mississippi anyway, hashas set things back, for the reason you say, that youcannot legislate againstagainst the mores and against a socialcondition. You can only state that the social condition is bad and must bechanged, but you can't change it overnight by passing laws. Well, I'd say that in Mississippi the May 17,1954, decision wasnot implemented, but it did move Mississippi to try and implement Plessyvs. Fergusson. [the schools] separate but equal. Well, they had been moving in that direction for some time. They had notmoved fast enough. And if there had been no Supreme Court decision, the whitepeople in Mississippi would've been content with the infinitesimal progress theywere making. The Supreme Court decision only warned them thatthey must move faster or something must be done, but it still has not changedthe situation in Mississippi. It has speeded up a gradualevolution, but it hasn't changed overnight any situation there.Well, my point is if it did accelerate even in Mississippi, thenit is laws that make effects. Well, yes. It was a statement which had effect. That was adecision. That wasn't a law. It was simply a decision onon the lawwhich the Supreme Court made. It hadn't changed the law in Mississippi.Mr. Faulkner. Going back to your symbolism, you said that the symbol when you'rewriting would mean one thing to one reader and perhaps another to anotherreader. When you write, are you ever conscious of writing for a certain group ofreaders? Do you ever write and then decide, "Well, this won't be[as] good, and I'll change it"? No, no. I think the writer writes for himself. In fact, I wrote foryears before it occurred to me that strangers might read what I was writing,that the writer writes for himself. He's trying to make somethingperfect which wasn't here before. When he begins to temper what hewrites to who will read it, then I think the writing itselfsuffers, but he has got to observe certain rules ofof coherence, buthe is writing primarily to depict the worldman struggling in hiscondition as he himself saw it, that he has seen man in his condition struggleagainst it in his aspirations, his follies, his hopes, histragedy, which to that writer was so moving that he himself has got to put thatdown on paper, to capture what to him was magic. It may be, thoughhe is not writing for glory, it may be that he knows all the timethat some day, after his allotted span, he will pass through thelast wall of oblivion, and maybe what he's actually doing is simply writing onthat wall, "Kilroy was here." Mr. Faulkner [What do you think of] exaggeration as a literary device? I think it'sit's valid, just like fantasy, just likecomedy, just like tragedy, just like inversion. They areare valid in the sensethat the carpenter's tools are valid. Whatever the carpenterwants to use, which in his opinion will build the best chicken coop, is valid.He may decide to use his hammer backward or to saw withwith akitchen knife, but anything that to him is the best tool he can use to make thechickenhouse as near perfect as he can make it is valid. I think that no oneshouldshould write just to be funny or just to be fantastic.I'll take that back. Hehe is perfectly at liberty towrite just to be funny or just to be fantastic, but I think the onethe man that's doing that is like the man that writes primarily to be a stylist,that he hasn't got a whole lot to say, that what he has to say is not valid andurgent in the sense of depicting man in his struggle with himself, with hisfellows, with his environment.Mr. Faulkner.  I think they're restatements. Actually, there're only three subjects towrite about: love, money and death. Peoplewriters write about men andwomen in the tragedy of the human condition, and theverities which man struggles with areare eternal. Theyhaven't changed much, and his problems are new only in that they are new andnovel to that individual, just like to the young man and young woman, therenever was love before like ours, like the one I feel now at 17 and 18 and 19. Therenever was grief or tragedy like that which I feel now. Inin thatsense only is the material new. Actually, it'sit's very old, butit'sthe very fact that it can be that old is anindication of man's immortality, I think, that he does endure. Hehashas lasted so long that there's nothing new in hisaspiration and hope, save to himself, that there's nothing new in his tragedy,save to himself, that he still can want to be better than he is. He can stillbelieve that injustice shall not endure; it must be changed; it must becorrected. His progress is very slow, almost infinitesimal, but there isprogress. Little children, for instance, don't have to work in sweatshops. Yourgrocer can't sell you poisoned food. Some progress. People are concerned enoughto try to do away with war, to do away with poverty. That's someadvancement. Man should've advanced much faster, I grant you. That's someadvancement, andand if it were not for that capacity to advance, thatdesire to advance, very likely he would've been effaced from the earth long beforethis, along with the dinosaur and the other big lizards.  Sometimes the characters in my books surprise me, yes. They don't surpriseme in doing something that I never heard of or never imagined human beings doingbefore, but I hadn't expected them to do it at that moment.That'sthat's because, as I said, mychore as a writer is to run along behind these people and put down what they sayand do, but if they do things which to me seem completely outside the realm ofhuman behavior, then I know that's wrong and that's false andand mustbe thrown away.  [Sir, do you constantly add to these characters] Well, I don't add. Thethe stories I'm working on do,suddenly it turns up withwith some bloke I've never heard of before. It doesn't mean Sir, [could you] make the distinction between the description of acharacter, having run behind them[and a news clip in the daily newspaper]? Well, there'sit seems to me this difference,the piece in the daily newspaper is a correlation, agathering of facts after the fact. That is, no reporter can follow along behindthe people who are approaching a cris or a climax or a crime, say. The writercan do that. He can start when they get up that morning and follow thecharacters up to the moment when they pull the trigger or rob the bankoror jump in the water and save the baby, but the reporter has got togo around andand ask people what happened, what did you see. There'sthat difference. It'syou might say the same thing butbutone is approached from behind it, the other from in front of it.[Is that enough to warrant an approach to the subjectImean do we find in this] [position of the observeris that sufficient to give a titleto a newspaper or to a novel]? Well, it's sufficient. Only the man that is writing thesame circumstances for the novel is compelled to do a little more research, thatis, the reporter cancan ask, inquire, seek out and get the simplefacts, and since it'sit's printed in thein the newspaper,the reader will accept that. In the book, the writer is not toosure that his readers will accept that, so he's got to take the fact, if that'swhere he starts, then he's got to go backward to follow thesepeople up to the point, to explain why theythey perform that action.They are quite alike, the two crafts, but they must be approached, as I said,one fromfrom behind the fact, one from in front of the fact. We mightsay that if it's in the newspaper, you believe it; if it's in the book, you'vegot to prove it.Since one is, on its face,fiction, and the other is supposed to be fact.Sir, in your writings, do you have a particular character orsituation or do you find that you like to have a specific character do a certain thing so that certain characteristicsring true?Or do you have that situationcome up a lot? I mean, in that you liked the sound of the bell, you like tohear it, you like to put it down on paper regardless of the characters? No, I don't. No, no, it's that character that rings that bell, not me.By that time, the character has taken chargeofof his own tale, and no matter what I want him to do, he may do it,and he may not do it, but he's going to decide what he does next. He's going todecide if he wants to ring that bell. I just report the fact that he rang thatbell. I believe you had a question.I would like to know how you started writing? How did I start writing?Yes,  Well, I'd always liked to scribble, probably, just like thewould-be lawyer likes to argue maybe and the would-be doctor or biologist likesto cut up flies,but I think I became aprofessional writerI was living in New Orleans, and I met SherwoodAnderson, and I liked him at once. We would meet in the afternoon and walkaround New Orleans, and he would talk, and I would listen. We would meet againin the evening, and we would go to a pleasant courtyard and sit over a bottle ofwhiskey, and he would talk, and I would listen until 12 and 1 and 2o'clock. The next morning he'd be in seclusion working. We'd meet again in theafternoon, again in the evening, and the next morning he's in seclusion working,and I thought to myself, if that's all it took to be a writer, then . And so I started a book, and right away I found that writingwas fun. And I hadn't seen Mr. Anderson inin weeks. I met Ms.Anderson on the street one day. She said, "What the matter? Are you mad at us?"I said, "No, ma'am. I'm writing a book." She said, "Good God."I saw her again, and she asked me how the book wasgetting on. I told her, "Just fine." She said, "Do you want Sherwood to readit?" I hadn't thought of anybody reading it. I said, "Well'm, if he wants to, it's all right with me." She said, "Well, he says he'll make a trade with you. Ifhe don't have to read that book, he'll tell his publisher to take it." So Isaid, "Done," And I finished the book, and hetold his publisher, Mr. Liveright, to take it, and that's how I got printed. But up to that time, I'd never thought ofbeing a professional writer because it was still fun. That's the first time I'd ever really connected money withwith writing a book. ButtheI think the pleasure in scribbling must have beenthere all the time. I imagine that as soon as I learned to spell, I must have been trying to writesomething, . I don't remember what it could've been, but that'sthat's acurse that we're probably born with . Yes,sir.When you are writing a book,are you ever conscious oftrying to put up a philosophy of your own through [a reading of] yourcharacters? No, sir, I'm not. I think that'sthat's one thing that shouldbe on the front page of every book: the author is not responsible forthe opinion of these people inside. That'sthat's their notion. Of course, when they agree with me, I'mhappy to put down what they say. When they don't agree with me, Istill put it down, but their opinions are theirs. I think that if the writer isgoing to write simply to express his own opinions, then he is not primarily afiction writer, he's a propagandist or a polemicist, that the writeris engaged primarily in writing about people engaged in the amazing, eternallyinteresting follies and tragedies and heroism which people are engaged. That thesymbolism, the style, the philosophy, the ideas are only coincidental andprobably to the writer not too important.Mr. Faulkner? In some of the statements published about you in the news stories that youhave made the distinction between yourself and the demon who makes you write.Who or what is that demon? Well, sir, I don't know myself. Probably he harasses me toomuch for me to have a good chance to turn and look at him. It could be, as Isay, a desire to leave some mark onon the world sothat people after you will know that for a little while thatSmith was here.He made this scratch. Itwell, I don't thinkit'sit'sit's for glory. It's certainly not for profit,because there are many moremore profitable things than being awriter. Itit'sit's certainly not to changeman's condition. If anything, I would say that's what it is, it's simply toleave a scratch onon the earth that showed that you were here for alittle while. When or how do you decide on the titles? Titles, I think thewell, in my case, the good titles are likegentle lightning strokes. I don't know where they come from. Suddenly there isjust exactly the right title. The only time I ever hunt forever hadto hunt for a title it was a bad one. It never did please me. The others I don'tknow where they came from. Suddenly the situation, the character, the book orsomething about it brings the title out ofout of the mysteriousunknown or out of the background or experience. I don't know where it comesfrom.Not always at the beginning ? Sometimes the title is the first thing, the title invents the story.Sometimes the title appears in the middle of the story. I've never had one thatfinished without a title, that I had to hunt around and invent one.In the title of Requiem for a Nun, does the Nun have to refer to [either] Temple Drake Stevens or toNancy? The nun was Nancy. Well, it was in thethat tragic life of aprostitute which she had had to follow simply because she was compelled by herenvironment, her circumstance, to be it. Not for profit nor any pleasure. Shewas just doomed and damned by circumstances to that life. And despite that, shewas capable of within herher poor dim lights and reasonsof an act, whichwhether it was right or wrong, was awas a complete, almost religiousabnegation of the world forfor the sake ofof anofan innocent child. That wasit was paradoxical, the use of the word"nun" for her, but Ibut to me that added something toher tragedy.  did your title The Sound and theFury come from Shakespeare's Macbeth? Yes.Yes, there must have been a dozen books titled from that speech. Ithink that I had the best one.But I canthink of six or seven books all from that same speech.Mr. Faulkner Do you feel any compulsion to be understood? Does it make any differenceto you that a great many of [us are] confused by what you are drivingat? Well, it's not a compulsion. It's a regret that I'm not, but there's thedemon.It'sthe writer has got to write sofast because he knows that, anyway, he'll never live long enough to write all hewants to, and he wishes that he could be more coherent and could write simplerand plainer, but there's that need to get the whole history ofman's heart onto the head of that pin during his threescore and ten years, andhe hasn't got time to go back and rewrite it, which hehe wishes hedid have time.If he could call time out and rewrite the book and make itclear and simple, but he don't have time because that one was wrong, and he'sgot to write another one, to still try to put the history of man's hope andaspiration and passion and tragedy and folly and comedy on the head of a pinbefore he has to go through the last ultimate bottomless wall. Do you feel that your characters are universal ? [I knowthat you are a regional writer] and I just wondered, or do youcare?  I feel that the verities which these people suffer are universalverities. That is, that man, whether he's black or white or red or yellow, stillsuffers the same anguishes, he has the same aspirations, his follies are thesame follies, his triumphs are the same triumphs. That is,his struggle is against his own heart, againstwith thehearts of his fellows, and with his background. And, in that sense, there's nosuch thing as a regional writer. The writer simply uses the terms he is familiarwith best because that saves him having to do research. That hewritemight write the book about Chinese, but if he does that, he's gotto do some research or somebody'll say, "Ah! You're wrong there. That ain't theway Chinese behave." But if he uses his own region, which he's familiar with, itsaves him that trouble.To what degreethe characters ?  None. There was never a writer that wasn't convinced thathe could create much better people than God can.That's why no writer can ever write his own biography. He can't tell thetruth that long.Because a fiction writeris a congenital liar to begin with, you see.That's what makes hima fiction writer. That's what the word fiction means.And so he not onlycouldn't tell the truth, he'she's convinced that he could create much better truth than circumstance can. do you ever have a character [that you are soenthused with] and had to [in a word] cut him out? Yes, in the sense thatyes, that you get too fond of acharacter, too amused at him or too interested, andand hehe will say anddo things whichfor which there'sthere's no place in thestory you're telling, that you have to throw away, yes. That's just a matter ofusing thehaving enough ruthlessness to use the blue pencil. That what hehe does is still true enough, stillhuman enough, but there's simply no place for that in the patternof the story which you're trying to tell, so you've got to cut it out.Yes, that happened once or twice. Yes,ma'am. why are you so fond of the Compsons and the Snopses?  Well, I feel sorry for the Compsons. That was blood which was good andbrave once, but hashas thinned and faded all the way out. Of theSnopes, I'm terrified.   That was tour de force, of course. Itook these people ofof the kind which I know, andsimply subjected them to the two fiercest natural cataclysms, whichare flood and fire. That was a certain amount of deliberatesymbolism.But to me, the very fact that these people endured for a reason thaton the face of it was foolish, that is, to carry their mother that far just tobury her, but it was noble in that they had promised her to do that, and so theywerethey had dropped their own baseness, their own pettiness, tofollow out this simple wish of the mother, whichwas noble, even though it was foolish, and that to me is anotherindication that man is immortal, that he will endure because even in his folly,he's capable of doing something not for his profit at all butsimply because his conscience or something, call it God if you like, says dothis, and so even in his folly, without believing that he is that brave and thatcompassionate, he does brave and noble things.Mr. Faulkner Have you been influenced by The Divine Comedy [in any way]? I have, like every writer, been influenced by every word I ever readfrom the telephone book up and down.I thinkthat that's true of anyone that writes, that he is completelyamoral. He steals right and left without even knowing he's doing that. He stows that away and then if he ever needs it, he reaches in his mind, and he digs itup and uses it. Yes, sir, I've been influenced by that, by everything I've read.Not deliberately. You just can't help it. That's a part of theof theexperience which makes manthe man or the child want to be awriter.You said you only liked to scribble, did you like [to parsesentences]  No, sir, I didn't. I had to learn something about that inorder to follow my craft, but I never did like to go to school, andI stopped going to school as soon as I got big enough to play hookyand not be caught at it. That was about the sixth grade, but I had to learntheto use the tools of my craft just asas thewoodchopper's got to learn to use an ax in order not to chop his own feetoff.  these characters that you follow along, do they come to anatural conclusion, or do you have to cut them off, or do they tell thestory and that's the end of it, or what? No, no, they exist. They arethey are still in motion in mymind. I can laugh at things they're doing that I haven't got around to writingyet. No, that's where the rules of the craft come in, thatsomeone, some editor, has got to give the whole thing unity, coherence, andemphasis, to start at a decent starting place and then stop it somewhere at alogical, reasonable place. But the characters themselves, they walk on out ofthat book still in motion, still talking, and still acting.[ because of your interrupted education, it makes me wonderif formal education ] I think that nobody can know too much, can learn too much. I think thatone can be a writer without the formal education. I think the formal educationwill not do the writer any more harm than anybody else,but I'm convinced thatnobody can be taught anything, that you must learn it. And the value of formaleducation is that all the knowledge, the wisdom, the opinions onthe wisdom, on the knowledge which makes wisdom, is there convenient for you toget. Otherwise, you've got to run from pillar to post to find what is rightthere offered to you. But nobody can teach anybody anything, I'm convinced ofthat. You've got to want to know it. You've got to want to learn it. I meant that love and money and death arethethe skeletons on which the story is laid. They havenothing to do with thewith the aspirations and the conflicts of thehuman heart involved. Butbut the story hashas got to havesome skeleton, and the skeletons areare love or money or death. InSutpen's case, there washehe needed the money in order tosatisfy his aspiration. And it was his foreknowledge of deathwhich compelledimpelled in him the haste to becompletely ruthless, to do it while he still could. Thelove was apart ofof his conflict, too. He wantedwantedthat son forfor vanity, of course. But you'vevanity is notreally enough. You've gotgot to love the thing thatyou can be vain because of, or proud because of. It had to be his son, notjusthe could've adopted a child, you see, andand carvedout a plantation [theand] fromfrom Greece, from Olympus in it somewhere. It lasts just for aday or two, then it's gone, but every year in August that occurs in [ourcountry], and that's all that title meant.It was justtome a pleasant, evocative title because itit reminded meofof that time, of a luminosity older than our Christiancivilization. Maybe the connection was with Lena Grove who had something of thatpagan quality ofof being able to assume everything, the desireforfor that child. She was never ashamed of that child, whether ithad any father or not. She was simply going to follow the conventional laws ofthe time in which she was and find its father. But as far as she was concerned,she didn't especially need the father for it, any more than thethanthe women thaton whom Jupiter begot children were anxious for a homeand a father. It was enough to have had the child. And that was all that meant,just that luminous, lambent quality of an older light than ours.Is ""Rose for Emily" all fiction?Yes, sir, that'sthat's all fiction, for the reasonI said, too. If any time a writer writes anything that seems atall familiar to anybody anywhere, he gets a letter about it, and if they thinkhe got enough money, he's sued, too, so he's awful carefulnot to write anything he ever saw himself, oranybody ever told him. we're all very grateful to you for coming thisafternoon. I want to thank you so much. Thank you.  This interminable valedictory doesseem to be coming to an end at last. I have tried to express to Mr. Gwynn andMr. Blotner how much pleasure I have had here. I would like to say to the peopleof Charlottesville, too, how much pleasure this has been for me. It's been somuch pleasure, that I am a little concerned about whether it could have done anygood or not, that anything this much fun must be bad[someway].  There is a ridge; you drive on beyond Seminary Hill andin time you come upon it: a mild unhurried farm road presently mounting tocross the ridge and on to join the main highway leading from Jefferson tothe world. And now, looking back and down, you see all Yoknapatawpha in thedying last of day beneath you. There are stars now, just pricking out as youwatch them among the others already coldly and softly burning; the end ofday is one vast green soundless murmur up the northwest toward the zenith.Yet it is as though light were not being subtracted from earth, drained fromearth backward and upward into that cooling green, but rather had gathered,pooling for an unmoving moment yet, among the low places of the ground sothat ground, earth itself is luminous and only the dense clumps of trees aredark, standing dark and immobile out of it. Then, as though at signal, the fireflieslightning-bugsof the Mississippi child's vernacularmyriad and frenetic, random andfrantic, pulsing; not questing, not quiring, but choiring as if they weretiny incessant appeaseless voices, cries, words. And you stand suzerain andsolitary above the whole sum of your life beneath that incessant ephemeralspangling. First is Jefferson, the center, radiating weakly its puny glowinto space; beyond it, enclosing it, spreads the County, tied by thediverging roads to that center as is the rim to the hub by its spokes,yourself detached as God Himself for this moment above the cradle of yournativity and of the men and women who made you, the record and chronicle ofyour native land proffered for your perusal in ring by concentric ring likethe ripples on living water above the dreamless slumber of your past; you topreside unanguished and immune above this miniature of man's passions andhopes and disastersambition and fear and lust and courage and abnegationand pity and honor and sin and pride all bound, precarious and ramshackle,held together by the web, the iron-thin warp and woof of his rapacity butwithal yet dedicated to his dreams. They are all here, supine beneath you, stratified andsuperposed, osseous and durable with the frail dust and the phantomstherich alluvial river-bottom land of old Issetibbeha, the wild Chickasaw king,with his Negro slaves and his sister's son called Doom who murdered his wayto the throne and, legend said (record itself said since there were old menin the county in my childhood who had actually seen it), stole an entiresteamboat and had it dragged intact eleven miles overland to convert into apalace proper to aggrandise his state; the same fat black rich plantationearth still synonymous of the proud fading white plantation names whetherweI mean of course theyever actually owned a plantation or not: Sutpen andSartoris and Compson and Edmonds and McCaslin and Beauchamp and Grenier andHabersham and Holston and Stevens and De Spain, generals and governors andjudges, soldiers (even if only Cuban lieutenants) and statesmen failed ornot, and simple politicians and over-reachers and just simple failures, whosnatched and grabbed and passed and vanished, name, face and all. Thenthe roadless, almost pathless perpendicular hill-country of McCallum andGowrie and Frazier and Muir translated intact with their pot stills and still peaking onlyspeaking only the old Gaelic and not much of that, from Culloden toCarolina, then from Carolina to Yokpatawpha still intact and still speaking not much of anything except that they now called the pots "kettles" though the drink(even I can remember this) was still usquebaugh; then and last on to whereFrenchman's Bend lay beyond the southsoutheastern horizon, cradle of Varners andant-heap of the northeast crawl of Snopes. And you stand thereyou, the old man, alreadywhite-headed (because it doesn't matter if they call your gray hairspremature because life itself is always premature which is why it aches andanguishes) and pushing forty, only a few years from fortywhile there risesup to you, proffered up to you, the spring darkness, the unsleeping darknesswhich, although it is of the dark itself, declines the dark since dark is ofthe little death called sleeping. Because look how, even though the last ofwest is no longer green and all of firmament is now one unlidded studdedslow-wheeling arc and the last of earth-pooled visibility has drained away,there still remains one faint diffusion, since everywhere you look about thedark panorama you can still see them, faint as whispers: the faint and shapelesslambence of dogwood blooming return loaned light to light as the phantomsof candles would. And you, the old man, standing there while there risesto you, about you, suffocating you, the spring dark peopled and myriad, twoand two seeking never at all solitude but simply privacy, the privacydecreed and created for them by the spring darkness, the spring weather, thespring which anwhich an American poet, a fine one, a woman and so she knows, calledgirls' weather and boys' luck. Which was not the first day at all, not Edenmorning at all because girls' weather and boys' luck is the sum of all thedays: the cup, the bowl proffered once to the lips in youth and then nomore; proffered to quench or sip or drain that lone one time and even thatsometimes premature, too soon. Because the tragedy of life is, it must bepremature, inconclusive and inconcludable, in order to be life; it must bebefore itself, in advance of itself, to have been at all. Mr. Faulkner? Inin this book, The Town, we comeacross so many of the characters we have met previously.Are those four snaky Snopeses new? Are the what Snopes new?The four snaky Snopeses, in the last chapter? Not to me. I thought ofofof these people thirty years ago, andand themore I thought about them, the more Snopes they invented. It's simply that Ihaven't got around yet to telling about them. There's one more volume, whichI hope will be the last, but I have no assurance that it will be.It may be that when I finish that there willstill be another. But they areare not new to me. They have been inbeen aliveand have been in motion. I have hated them and laughed at them and been afraidof them for thirty years now. Fascinating. That was Djuna Barnes. She belonged to one of the first minute, preciousexpatriate groups back in thewhen was that? Twenties. Yes, the early Twenties. Djuna Barnes, it was. I don't knowwhether she's still alive or not. Do you know?Mr. Faulkner? Who will inherit Jefferson if and when the[Snoopses] or Snopeses are ever exterminated? Well, I believe that man can cope with all his follies. I thinkthat the fact that Snopeses can flourish is just a symptom of man's follybut that man copes with it, that he willwill rid himself ofof even theSnopeses by some desire for simple decency. Maybe it's just in order to getalong withwith his fellow men and women in Jefferson, but he will cope with Snopeses andand what is good in our country willwill still endure. It maytake aa different phase from what ourour ancestors knew it before 1861, but Ithink that even Snopeses can be coped with and even hydrogen bombs can be copedwith. Sir, you dabbled in poetry a little bit before you began writing. Did youever have any published at all or One book. I'm a failed poet. I still think of myself as a failed poet. Ibelieve that any writer wants first to be a poetrya poet. When he finds that hecan't write first-rate poetry, and poetry of all must be first-rate. There areno degrees of it. It's either first-rate or it's bad. It's rotten. Then he triesshort stories, which is the next severe medium. When that fails, then he goes to thenovel.That is, he wants first to taketakethe tragedy and passion ofof experience, of life, and put it into fourteenwords. If he can't, he tries two thousand words. If he fails that, then he takesa hundred thousand.  Where do plays work with that[category]? The play partakes of a little of all. That is, aa specialspecializedmedium almost. Itit mustto be good, it must partake ofof all three: of thepoetry, of the short story, and the novel, but certainly it'sit's above thenovel because it don't take quite as many words.That a good playwright don'thave to talk as long as a novelist has to talk to tell his story. No, I doubt if anyone has a favorite poem, unless it's somebody that hasa favorite poem by Edgar A. Guest that's good for visitors, and I I don't think anyone could have afavorite poem. It depends onon how you feel, what you like to read andremember, [of] something that you have seen or run into that makes you thinkof truth as some poet has expressed it.Mr. Faulkner? In A Fable was there any definite attempt on your partto more or less put it in biblical language? That was the only book I ever wrote from an idea, and so I can't saymyself just how much of the intent was deliberate to follow the story of thePassion Week or a pattern ofof any Christian legend or even the language of theBible, though I'mI'm quite sure that thethat the deliberate intent was there,but how much I can't say because I think the writer, when he is busy tellinghis story, he hasn't really got time to think about style oror about thepattern ofof his sentences. He's too busy.But anyone writing writes fromhis own experience, his own observations, his own imagination, and all he hasread is a part of his experience, and so in the heat and fury ofofcomposing his piece, he will reach back into his memory, and he will dig up allsorts of things and will fit them into the joint just as the carpenter does witha board until he finds the one that makes the best joint or makes thesoundest corner or the driest roof, and so I think that no man can say just howmuch ofof a style, a method, is deliberately deliberate or unconsciouslydeliberate or what. In fact, he's so busy trying to tell his story that he don'treally care.Do you do much rewriting, Mr. Faulkner? No more than I can help. I'm lazy, and I'd heap rather think of a storyandand laugh over it myself than to go to the trouble to put it down on thepaper. I put that off as long as possible. Then when it worries me so much Ican't put it off anymore, then I put it down, and I try to be sure that it'sright, so I won't to have to rewrite it, though sometimes it'sit's wrong, and Ido have to.Well, how are yourare yourcharacters created out of your own imagination or are they taken from peopleyou've known? Any writer is completely amoral. Any artist is. He takes what he thinkshe will need from any source with no compunction and with no sense of beingamoral or unmoral, because anyone after him is perfectly at liberty to takeanything from him they want. Also, I doubt if any writer would be satisfiedwithwith men and women just the way the Lord makes them. He's convinced he canmake a much better job than that.And anyfiction writer is a congenital liar to begin with, and he probably couldn't tellthe truth about anything, that no matter what he tried to tell the truth about hewould embroider just a little.Mr. Faulkner? After you have written your book and maybe read it over two or threeyears later, do you find symbolism in it that you didn't realize at the timeyou were writing it? Do you findyou ever find more in it than you realized atthe time you were writing it? I doubt if a writer ever reads his book again.I think thatthat's one saving thing he hasin his craft, that every time he writes a book, he knows that's one book hewon't have to read.Also, the reason that thewriter writes another book is that one that he finished wasn't quite good enoughto suit him, and he don't want to read that book anymore. He wants to forgetthat book because he's trying to write the next one, which may be good enough.Of course, he knows that one probably won't be good enough, too, but that's whatkeeps him going. That's why, taken by and large, his life is so happy. He hassomething to wake up tomorrow morning to need to do, not to want to do, butto need to do, that drives him to do it. But it's never quite good enough forhim, so he doesn't need to read it again. He's not interested in what anybodyelse thinks about it because he himself knows it ain't good enough for him, andthat's the only opinion he really cares about.Mr. Faulkner? You often have referred to male authors that you have enjoyed. Are thereare any women writers you esteem? Yes, any number. Bront or Willa Cather, Ellen Glasgowanynumber. I think that when I refer to authors as males I'm simply using"he" asas sort of aa simplified term to express an individual. Yes, anynumber ofof good ones.Was WutheringHeights one of your favorite books? I remember you gave us a list, andI don't remember them all. I don't really have favorite books. I have books that I read many timesover and over, but it's not for the book, it's for the people in it. There'recertain people that I like to read about, just as you like to go into a room andspend thirty minutes with an old friend, and WutheringHeights is a book that I have admired for its craftsmanship,butbut there'sthere's nothing in it that I would everever read againprobably, though some day I might.Mr. Faulkner? When an idea germinates for a story, do you start with the story or thesituation or with the characters, a certain character that interests you? Sometimes it's a situation, an anecdote oror a picture. Usually,it's a character.Usually it's a character? And the character takes charge of theof the whole thing and begins toinvent his supporting cast, andand then they all go charging away at full speedand tell the story, and all I do is just to run along behind them and put itdown.But they take charge of it. It'sit'susually a character, though occasionally an anecdote of something, a picture,a mental image that hashas to do withwith something of the human condition. Iwrote one book fromfrom the mental picture of a little girl climbing a tree tolook in a forbidden parlor window. She'd fallen down in the mud on a rainyafternoon, and the image was the muddy seat ofof that child about twelve orthirteen years old, the muddy seat of her drawers,and that was, I think, thewhat the book came from. did you startwritingnow, you probably answered this question a million timesbut did youstart writing at a definite period of your life or have you always written moreor less since the time you were a little boy? I imagine that I hadhad been scribbling as soon as I learned to spell.I've told this story before. If anyone has heard it, I hope they will excuse itthis time. That was as soon as I learned to spell, and I'd always liked toimagine stories and occasionally put something down, but I was stillhad nottaken it seriously until I was in New Orleans. I was working for a bootlegger.This was back in thein the twenties, and I met Sherwood Anderson, and we likedeach other right away. We would meet in the afternoon. We would walk around theFrench Quarter along the docks, and he would talk, and I would listen. We'd meetagain in the evening. We'd go to a nice patio or courtyard, and we'd sit overa bottle of whiskey, and he would talk, and I would listen. In the morning, Iwouldn't see him. He'd be in seclusion working. And that would go on day afterday, the afternoons to walk and laugh and talk, and the evenings to drink andlaugh and talk, in the mornings, in seclusion working. And I thought that ifthat was all it took to be a writer, that was exactly the life for me.  So, I started a book, and right away I found thatit was fun, that I liked it, and I got so interested in it, I forgot about Mr.Anderson. I hadn't seen him for several weeks, and I met Mrs. Anderson on thestreet. She said, "What's wrong? Are you mad at us? We haven't seen you in along time." I said, "No, ma'am. I'm writing book." She said, "Good God."  I met her a week or two after, and she askedabout the book. I said I was just about to finish it. She said, "Do you wantSherwood to read it?" I hadn't thought of anybody reading it. I said, "Well'm,he can if wants to." She said, "Well, Sherwood says he'll make a swap with you.If he don't have to read that book, he'll tell his publisher to take it." So Isaid, "Done,"and he told his publisher totake the book, and that's how I becametook up writing seriously. Up to thattime, I'd done itwell, it never occurred to me that anybody might want to read it orhadn't thought of it in public terms till then.But if you hadn't met Sherwood Anderson, it would have been inevitable,though. Oh, yes. Yes, indeed. I think the writer is driven by a demon that hecan't help himself anymore. That's a vice, really. Nothing he can do about it. And he just wastes time fighting it.Best thing is to go on and be a writer. What,would you give as your definition of poetry? It's some moving, passionate moment of the human condition distilled toits absolute essence. This is a probably a question you've been asked many times also. Why haveyouor have you ever been tempted to do play-writing? No, probably because I have spent all my life in the country, and I cancount on my thumbs almost the plays I've seen.I havenever thought in terms ofofof theater. It may be it takes aa specialtemperament to do it, but I have nevernever thought in terms of theater. I'msure the main reason is that I've never seen enough of it, that I like to readplays. I'd much rather read one than see one.Considering the Sherwood Andersonconnection, had he written Winesburg, Ohio when you methim? Yes. Yes, he was working onon Dark Laughterthen. Hethat was after Winesburg and after The Triumph of the Egg. His two best, I think.Well, his best character seems to have been George Willard, and isn't ita bit tragic that he left him in Winesburg and neverrevived him? I don't think so. That George Willard is alive enough. There's no needto harass and worry the man to death.Hehas come alive, and, asas you say, he's the best character. That'senough.Since your characters, for instance, [sometimes] comefrom your reading and your experiences, you must have occurrences of unconsciousplagiarism or at least fears that you have read it somewhere before. How do youcope with such a situation? Well, as I said, any writer is completely amoral, that he has verylikely stolen it from somewhere, but then he has no qualms about that becauseanyone after him that steals from him flatters him, and he assumes that everyother writer feels that way. There are so few things to write about, and thehuman condition changes so slowly, that very likely almost any situation, exceptfor a few minor differences, has already been written about by somebody, andvery likely you read it somewhere. That reading to me is part of one'sexperience, as much of one's experience asas dealing with actual fleshfreshflesh and blood people, but there'sI'm sure that any writer is ready to admit that hehas stolen from everything he ever read, and he has read everything from thetelephone book up and down.  you have been called, among other things, a Christianhumanist. I was wondering if you could tell me what you consider yourrelationship to the Christian religion? Why, the Christian religion has never harmed me, and I hope I never haveharmed it.I have the sort ofofprovincial Christian background which one takes for granted without thinking toomuch about it, probably. That I'mprobably within my own lights, I feel that I'ma good Christian. Whether it would please anybody else's standard or not, Idon't know.Do you know where your story isgoing when you start working, Mr. Faulkner? The end when youstart? Onlyonly twice have I known where the story was going. Once was inin Fable. The other was in a book called As I Lay Dying. They were both tour deforce, so I knew where they were going. The others, I don't know wherethey're going. I simply try to keep up with the people who have already gottenin motion, to put down what they do and say and then have a little timeafterward to throw away the trash, but Ithat's probably true withwithmost writers, unless they do write from afrom a synopsis, that they don't knowwhere the story's going. Some writers can work that way, and the indecision iseliminated. That is, that first draft, that first synopsis, may have takentakencare of theof the confusion which my method follows about where the thingis going.Do you have a synopsis or do you No'm, I never have a synopsis, and I never have maderesearch anddon't keep notes, because if I was going to go to the trouble to keep notes, I'dtry to write it so I could print it. It's too much trouble. I don't like towrite that much. did you study orhave a formal [writing classes][college]? I didn't go to college. I didn't like school and quit in the sixthgrade. I'm the oldest living sixth grader.Ithink I learned to write in the only possible way that there is to learn to write,which is to read and to read and to read and to try it and to try it and to try it until ituntil it suits you, which, of course, it won't do. But to try and to tryand to try, but reading is the way to learn to write. I doubt if anyone canbe taught anything anyhow, but I don't believe anyone can be taught to write.You've got to be demon-driven and to want to learn in spite ofeverything.Mr. Faulkner? You say you follow your characters with a notebook and recall what theydo and say. You do not plan any of the conversations? No'm, I don't.Or any of the incidents? No.You're not responsible for anything they do? No, ma'am. I'm not responsible for anything they do or say.  Any ideas they express are theirs and not mine.If I have the same idea, it's purely coincidental.  do you find that youcan write almost anywhere, on a train, or riding in the back seat of a car?Or inan office? Oh, yes. Sure, just anywhere. I put it off as long as I can. Then when Ican't put off any longer, I can write anywhere, on anything, and with anythingexcept a typewriter. I'm not much good with a typewriter.Mr. Faulkner? Have you picked up anything interesting, [whether] ideasor people, during your stay in Charlottesville?  That comes back to theto the writer's completeamorality, that he don't have to say now, let's see ifthere's anything in this alley that I can use. He just picks it up, whether hecan use it or not,and later on he finds that maybe he can, but hedon'the's[Calls for] a phenomenal memory, then? Well, it'sit's a phenomenal memory in the sense that the muscleremembers, that it's not anything that's really catalogued into the mind.It's catalogued into whatever muscles of the human spirit produce the bookor the music or the picture, and we'll assume that there are muscles in thespirit that do that. Thethe artist iswell, it's a little more thankleptomania, it's a little of kleptomania.Butrather more ofof whatever itis that makes the magpie pick up everything or the packrat pick up anythingthat's loose. I think that's the way the writer goes through life, through booksand through the actual living world, too. That he misses very little, notbecause he's made up his mind before breakfast not to miss anything today, butbecause those muscles do it for him, and when the need comes, he digs outthings that he didn't know where he saw them, which to him don't matter. He mayhave stolen ithe probably didbut to him that's not important. The importantthing is if he uses it worthily. If he makes some base use of it then, ofcourse, it's a shame. But he wants towhen he steals, he wantshe wants theowner that he stole from to approve of what he did with it, or not to disapprovetoo much. happen among people, and if anything can happen toimprove man's condition and get rid of his bother and trouble, it will be foramateur to meet amateur, not for professional to meet professional, but foramateur to meet amateur, and if I do have the amateur quality thatpeople in Charlottesville havehave felt and been insympathy with, thenthen my time here has been more than just happy,it's been worthwhile, too. I imagine that there could be circles,conditions in which the Writer-In-Residence would have to be a literary man,butbut I'm not a literary man, andand I'm happy to knowthat in Charlottesville, at least, I've been forgiven for that. How much of yourself do you include in your characters?  Well, I consider that I'm in the public domain, just like you and Mr.Gwynn and anybody else that I meet, but I'm still convinced that I can make amuch better job of Faulkner than God made of Faulkner, so I willif Iwere writing my own biography very likely I couldn't possibly tell the truthabout it.Actually, the writer has got towrite from experience, observation, imagination, andand imaginationand observation are bound to be colored just a little by experience, so actuallyany artist is simply recounting time after time his own biography or his ownhistory or his own reaction to the human condition, which iswhich isuniversal to all men.But his is awhat he thinks is a particular acheand anguish, which to him, anyway, is important enough to put into the music orthe picture or into the poem.But he must write from what he knows, and all heknows is just a little of himself because he will die not knowing too muchabout himself, but he would certainly know very little about anythingelse. Your demon sounds relentless. Is there any hope for anyone learning towrite if they have a part-time demon?  Well, I think that there's a limitless supplyof demons just like germs that hang around maybe just looking for lodgment inanyone that shows any aptitude for ink. That it'sthat'sasI said, it's a vice, and it's a virulent sort of vice, too. If you ain'tcareful, it'll get you.Mr. Faulkner? You've often talked about the [effort to convey] condition of man, do youthink that this can be achieved in comedy? Oh, yes, certainly, because so much of man's condition is comedy. It'sdifficult to say just where comedy stops and tragedy begins. His condition ishis eternal struggle with himself, with his fellows, and with his environment,and that takes the form ofofof comic or tragic situations,and the comic situations show the tragedy of his constant,indomitable striving with his own heart, the heart of mankind, or the conditionin which mankind has to function, so one is just as valid asthe other, just as important, and who can say just where one stops and the otherstarts? [isn't it] rather unusual for a man to write hisfirst book [setting in full-blown and starting] that way rather than an outline, maybe a firstchaptera whole book for the first time. Is that what's usually done? Well, it's probably a little unusual for a reasonably prospering young bootlegger to meet a writer like Sherwood Anderson. That don't happen to everybody, you know. how old were you then? Twenty-two, twenty-three. That was in the early '20s after the oldwar.Did he advise you on your writing? Did he criticize you? No'm, he wouldn't even read it. That was the trade he made.He would never read it. Did he talk about writing to you at all, about your work? No'm, we talked about people. Rather, he talked, and I listened. He wastelling me the fantastic stories, which later he would probably write, but Icouldn't believe any of it,because I knew hewas a writer. He talked, and I listened, but it was not about books becauseneither one of us were literary people, because we were not really interested inliterature and books. We were interested in people and the comic and tragicephemera of man's condition, interested in laughing, maybe. do you feel that a writer might be hampered by a collegeeducation? Keep him from creating the characters  No, sir, I do not. I think that a college education is not going tohamper anyone. I think that a lot of people are subject to it that don't deserveit and can do nothing with it, but it's not going to hamper anyone. I thinkthat the college education will save the writer a great dealofofof trouble, which he would have to go to in simplylearning about man, about the history, the record, the history ofman, that is available to him in the university, which otherwise he has got toget out and dig for himself, and I'm sorry that I didn't have acollege education myself. I think that if you have the demon you're goingto write anyway. Nothing is going to stop you, and it may be youdon't want things too easy. But I never heard of anyone that was hurt by acollege education, and any writer that says, "I would have been a good writerexcept"I put no stock in that because I believe that the "mute,inglorious Milton" is a complete myth. in spite of what happens to General Compson and ColonelSutpen and Colonel Sartoris, there seems to be a heroic quality about them. Doyou think that it is still possible for that kind of heroism in the time ofwhich the story in The Town is set? Yes, I think that although man is not always matched withhis finest hour, I'm convinced that the hour, the need finds themen itit requires. That the men likelike Compson andSutpen whowho had the desire to be heroic,they failed throughthrough lack of character or absence of things intheir character which should not have been there, but at least they tried. ButI'm convinced that the hour will find the men it needs. Though the tragedy isthe man who didn't find his hour, didn't find his chance to be whathe could have been and might have been.He's tragic.Mr. Faulkner? What effect, if any, have the opinions of literary critics hadon your writing? None. I don't read critics. I imagine that most writers don't. They'retoo busy. That is, the book the writer just finished ain't good enough. He knowsthat before he's finished it, and so he's forgot about that book. He's going totry one next that will be, and so since itit didn't meet with hisapproval, he don't care what anybody else's opinion of it is. And, in my owncase, I like to read, but I ain't going to read what anybody thinks aboutsomebody else's ideas. I'd rather read about people.Have you ever received any rejection slips, Mr. Faulkner?  Yes'm, for the first few years when I'd try to write short stories, Igot plenty of rejection slips.How did it affect you? Or did it? Well, I wouldI would be frustrated andandenraged in the time when I hoped I could get a little money for it, but if Ididn't need money at that time, it didn't make much difference. I sent itsomewhere else, oror I was busy still writing another one. I'dprobablythat'sI've heard it's had a very depressive affect on many writers. Itit could on a young writer, yes. I thinkthat the young writer maybe doesn't always know or doesn't alwayshave time to decide exactly why he writes.Under the pressure ofofourour culture, the only measure for his writing is whether peoplebuy it, whether it's in the magazines or not, and he accepts that, and it giveshim a lot of bother and trouble, until he gets along a little and realizesthat's not at all why one writes, that the reason one writes is from the fullknowledge of death that we all have.He knows that some day he will pass intooblivion. He has seen something soso moving, sobeautiful, so aching in the human condition that he wants to write about it, andwhat he is actually doing is to make a scratch on thatwall.Before he passes through the last wall into nothingness, he willleave on that wall "Kilroy was here." Not for glory, not for money, just tosay "I was here for a little while. I did this. I made something that wasn't herebefore." That's probably the reason he sticks at it, why he's not discouraged bya rejection slip. what became of those stories that were rejected in thefirst few years you were writing? Did you just abandon them? No, I kept them. I kept them, and after a while the folks that rejectedthem bought them.They bought them.   No, it's the sort of demon that is like the mosquito that won't let yousleep. You want to say, "Oh, go away, let'slet's be quiet a while.What's the use in going to all this bother and trouble just to write books andstories?" But it won't let you sleep. It's not that it says, "You must tell thisstory." It's just that it won't let you alone. That it keeps on whispering toyou, "If you wake up, this is a lot of fun. Come on. Wake up and try it now."The demon doesn't really care which story you write, then No'm, I think it's just against repose more than in favor ofanything.Do you see any faces as you describe characters? Do you see a physicalperson as you write? Yes, yes, I don't always hear a name, but I always see aphysical face, a body, mannerisms, and quite often they name themselves, but notalways.So where did you get your names? Thethe characters usually name themselves, or the situationnames the characters. I've never had to hunt around and say, "Now, let's see,what shall I call Smith this time?" That he has said, "This is who I am, and thisis what I'm going to be called."Have you usually known people with these names? No, I try not to use a name I've ever heard because once you do it, twodays later, you get a letter saying, "Dear Sir, I have just turned this matterover to my lawyer.How muchmoney [do you have]?" And so any writer is awfulcareful not to put down any name he ever heard oror to describe anyincident he ever actually saw. I read that you admired Mr. WolfeThomas Wolfe'swork very much. Just what about it, whatwhat do you admire about hiswork? Now, that was an unfortunate remark I made. It was a group of students. They asked me what I thought about mycontemporaries. I said, "It's too soon to say. We're not done writing." This was,oh, twentytwenty, thirty years ago. They said, "Well, don't you haveany opinion of them at all?" I said, "Opinion of who?" He named Wolfe, Caldwell,Hemingway, Dos Passos. And I said, "Well, I think we all failed, so I'll have torate us on what I consider the splendor of our failure, and so this is the way Iwould rate us," and ever since that I've been trying to explain that or live itdown.But that's all it was. To tell thetruth, I haven't read much of Wolfe. I've read one or two of his stories. I'veopened his books and read pages or paragraphs, but that was anopinion on the tremendous effort that he had gone into to try toput all ofof the history of the human heart on the head of the pin.That is, to tell it all in each paragraph until he died, as though he hada premonition of his own early death. That was what I meantbyby the failure. That he failed the best because he had tried thehardest, he hadhad taken the longest gambles, taken the longestshots. I rated Hemingway last not on the value ofof the product atall, but simply because ofof Hemingway having taught himself apattern, a method which he could use, and he stuck to that without splashingaround to try to experiment. It had nothing to do with the value of the work atall. It was simply on the degree of theof the attempt to reach theunattainable dream, to accomplish more than any flesh and blood mancould accomplish, could touch. I understand that in writing The Soundand the Fury, you meant for the first part, Benjy's story, to be the bookand then you went then on afterwards to add three more parts. What prompted youto do that? Did you feel the need to go on and explain? It was to be a short story. It was those three children who had beenforbidden to come into the house that afternoon, for what reason they didn'tknow. They only knew dimly that grandmama had been sick, andthey didn't know that they'd been forbidden to come in the house because of thefuneral, and they were curious enough to climb up to see why they couldn't gointo the parlor that they had been forbidden to enter. I thought it would be ashort story of ten pages maybe. It got longer and longer, and then I began toknow more and more about the people in it, and I finished the first section, andthat wasn't right.So I wrote another section. I let somebody else try it. Thatwasn't right. I let another brother try it. That still wasn't right. I tried itonce myself, and that still wasn't right. It still is notnot goodenough to suit me. It's still not the book that I'm convinced if I hadn'twritten it and could start again tomorrow, I would write it better. Probablywouldn't, but I'm convinced of that.Sir? I'd like to ask you abouttwo incidents in TheSound and the Fury, which I didn'tI didn'tIwasn't able to relate to the rest of the story, but I thought theywerethe fact that you threw them in was interesting.And onewaswell, I haven't read this for a while, and youyou say you haven'teither.One was about something to dowithwith a broken leg, as I recall. And another was a description ofan operation which took place in the woods, as I remember, with a razor blade.And I'd like for you to try to help me understand just how these fit in with therest of the book and what they had to do with the story asyou recall. I don't remember about the operation with the razor blade in the woods,though without doubt itit referred toto thecastration of the idiot child. After he had tried to molest a little girl, theyhad to do something about him, so he was castrated, and if the operation in thewoods had any application, and I can't remember now, it was probably somethingout of the older brother's garbled, half-mad history and background, which hehad used as as as a transference. Thethebrutality of it as a transference onto this shameful thing whichwhichhis idiot brother had had to suffer. Thethe broken boneIdon't rememberbut I'mI'mI worked so hard atthat book that I doubt if there's anything in it that didn'tbelong there. I would have to look at the book again to Oh, well, yes, that was to showthethe ignorance of these people in trying to repairthat broken bone with cement in order to make this completelyfoolish hegira with that decaying body, which they weredoing, which was in its own way heroic because they had promised that woman thatthey would take her back to her people to bury her, and so theywent through fire and flood and all possible natural catastrophesto do this thing, which didn't need to be done at all, but they hadpromised to do it, so they did.Sir, didwhen you wrote either The Sound and the Fury andorAs I Lay Dying, did youwere you consciousofof making the characters, the brothers and sisters and theirrelationships, somewhat similar? I mean, would you think back, asyouas you recallthat it seems to me that there's a certain type offamily relationship in each of the families, whichIwouldn'tI don't know which one of the books you wrote first Well, yes, probably there is, due to the fact that in each one of them,there was a sister surrounded by a gang of brothers.The one, As I Lay Dying, was tour de force. I knew when I put down the first word whatthe last word of that would be. The other was anything but tour de force. I was completely submerged in the other one.I struggled and anguished with it for a year. This isAs I Lay Dying I wrote in about six weeks withoutchanging any of it. If there is any relationship, it's probably simply becauseboth of them happened to have a sister in a roaringgang of men folks. you spoke about The Sound and theFury as starting out to write a short story, and it kept growing. Well,now, do you think that it's easier to write a novel than a short story? Yes, sir, you can be more careless. You can put more trash in it and beexcused for it than a short storythat's next to the poem. Almostevery word has got to be almost exactly right. In the novel you can be careless,but in the short story you can't. I mean by that the good short stories likeChekhov wrote. That's why I rate that secondit's becauseit'sit demands a nearer absolute exactitude. You have less room to beslovenly and careless. There's less room in it for trash. In poetry, of course,there's no room at all for trash. It's got to be absolutely impeccable,absolutely perfect.It's more like playwriting then? Yes'm, that's right. That's right. That's right. Of course, playwriting has one more demand,that you'reyou're not going to keep your audience that long. With abook you can read that a while and put it down and then go back and read it, butif it's a play you can't. If you don't use up your ticket tonight, you've got tobuy another ticket. would you careI think you've made us understandyour feeling that a writer is never satisfied with his work, but would you careto suggest which one of your works, or one or two of your works that youconsiderthat are your own favorites? Well, that goes back to the old standard of failure. Theone that's the dearest to me is the one that caused me the mostanguish and trouble, just like the idiot child isthe dearest to theto the parent, and that's The Sound and the Fury. That's the one I worked at thehardest, made the most splendid and to me the most beautiful failure, so that'sthe one that I love. The others didn't cause that much trouble. That is,II found out sooner that I couldn't make them perfect andwas willing to quit. With The Sound and the Fury, it tookme a long time to realize I couldn't make it good enough to suit me before I'dgive it up. Do you [like to] read modern works and if so, how do youchoose the ones that you like to read? I think most writers as they get old read less and less, and I know thatI read now the books that I knew and loved when I was a young man. I haven'tread a dozen contemporary books in the last dozen years, and theywere books which someone gave me and said, "Read this, I think you will like it,"or "There's something interesting in it," then I'll read it. But the reason I dois in the old books which I go back to as you go to call on an oldfriend and talk with him for a while. do you feel that your war experiences in World War I hadany significant influence on the perspective of the South that you developed inYoknapatawpha County? I don't know. As I said, the writer uses every experience that everhappened to him, and he is not interested in just how much one experience changeshis own point of view, that he is too involved and too engaged with the peoplethat he thinks he is writing about, that he hopes to make come alive and standup in three dimensions and cast a shadow behind them, that he himself can't saybecause he don't really care how much any of his own private experience haschanged him, that he's going to use it all, that he stores everything awaywilly-nilly, regardless, just asas the magpie picks up everything thatglitters, or as the professional carpenter don't ever throw away a plank nomatter how crooked or short it is, that some day he will use it.[Can I have one other] question in that general area?Doyou see or have you seen in the South an analogy between the Civil War and the First World War as you knew it? No, I don't. I imagine that literary expertsor maybe even war literary experts might find analogies. I myself don't recallany. All I remember about the only war I know about was that was the first warwhen if you were scared, you said so. Up to that time, nobody every admitted hewas scared.There may havethere wasa lot of romantic foolishness talked about air fighting in that war which wasn'treally there because you were still contending with a machine whichwould come to pieces or would burn up, that there was nothing oftheof the quality of matching youryour own skill againstanother human being with the same fine high hopes and desires that you had. Youwere involved with a confounded machine that would kill you. we're very grateful to you for being with us, and we thankyou very much. Well, thank you all. [audience applause]Good evening, ladies andgentlemen. On behalf of the Jefferson Society, Omicron Delta Kappa, and theRaven Society, I welcome you tonight to what we consider a rare honor and aprivilege. At this time, I would like to turn the meeting over to a gentlemanwho I don't believe could be anycould have been any more aptly chosen, agentleman who is a member of the Jefferson Society and at one time served as herpresident, who is a member of Omicron Delta KappaKappa, a member inlongstanding of the Raven Society and a holder of the Raven Award, Dean of theLaw School, Dean Ribble. Ladies and gentlemen, I shall notintroduce our distinguished speaker who happily has been a member of ourcommunity for a year and half. I would like to just say a word of thanks to thethree ancient and honorable organizations which have planned this meeting forus. They're all very old. As we say in law, so old that memorythe memory of manrunneth not to the contrary. The oldest, I believe, is the Jefferson Society. Itstarted in 1825 and had as one of its first members Edgar Allan Poe, so you seetheir interest in men of letters is quite old. The other two have equally andgreatly added to the life of this University, and the three of them are addingto their fame and to our debt of gratitude to them by presenting to us tonight agentlemen who is a great American, a great southerner, and one whom we're veryproud to have as a member of our university, Mr. William Faulkner.  With Dean Ribble's permission, Iwould like to elaborate that a little more. With Professor Stovall's blessings,Mr. Gwynn and Mr. Blotner have agreed that my tenure as writer-in-residence heremight be a little better if we kept it informal, serious but not tooconcentrated and continuous. That is, when I'm on the fifth floor of Cabell Hall,I'm writer-in-residence. When I'm not there, then I'm just a Mississippi citizenthat likes and admires Virginia and Virginia people. I hope that now youwill take me under those conditions, that I'm just a private citizen here thatlikes and admires Virginia, Virginia people, even when they may not like whatI'm going to say.That is, as far as theUniversity is concerned, I am free home here, and as far as you're concerned, Iam free game. Only do flush me first. Don't shoot me sitting.  Mr. Chairman, members of the Jefferson Society, the RavenSociety, ODK, and ladies and gentlemen, a hundred years ago Abraham Lincolnsaid, "This nation cannot endure half slave and half free." If he were alivetoday, he would amend it: "This nation cannot endure containing a minorityas large as ten percent held second class in citizenship by the accident ofphysical appearance." As a lesser man might put it, this nor any country orcommunity of people can no more get along in peace with ten percent of itspopulation arbitrarily unassimilated than a town of five thousand people canget along in peace with five hundred unbridled horses loose in the streets,or, say, a community of five thousand cats with five hundred unassimilateddogs among them, or vice versa.Forpeaceful coexistence, all must be one thingeither all first-class citizensor all second-class citizens, either all people or all horses, either allcats or all dogs. Perhaps the Negro is not yet capable of more thansecond-class citizenship. His tragedy may be that so far he is competent forequality only in the ratio of his white blood. But even if that is so, theproblem of the second-class citizens still remains. It would not solve theproblem even if the Negro were himself content to remain only a second-classcitizen, even though relieved of his first-class responsibilities by hisclassification. The fact would still remain that we are a nation establishedon the fact that we are only ninety percent unified in power. With onlyninety percent of unanimity, we would face, and hope to survive in it, aninimical world unified against us, even if only in inimicality. We cannot beeven ninety percent unified against that inimical world, which outnumbersus, because too much of even that ninety percent of power is spent andconsumed by the physical problem of the ten percent ofirresponsibles. It is easy enough for the North to blame on us, theSouth, the fact this problem is still unsolved. If I were a northerner,that's what I would do, tell myself that one hundred years ago weboth ofus, North and Southhad put this to the test and had solved it. That it isnot us, the North, but you, the South, who have refused to accept thatverdict. Nor will it help us any to remind the North that by ratio of Negroto white in population, there's probably more of inequality and injusticethere than with us. Instead, we should accept that gambit. Let us say to theNorth, "All right, it is our problem, and we will solve it." For the sake ofthe argument, let us agree that as yet the Negro is incapable of equalityfor the reason that he could not hold and keep it, even if were forced onhim with bayonets, that once the bayonets were removed, the first smart andruthless man, black or white, who came along would take it away from him,because he, the Negro, is not yet capable of, or refuses to accept, theresponsibilities of equality. So we, the white man, must take him in hand and teachhim that responsibility. This will not be the first time nor the last timein the long record of man's history that moral principle has been identicalwith and even inextricable from practical common sense. Let us teach himthat, in order to be free and equal, he must first be worthy of it, and thenforever afterward work to hold and keep and defend it. He must learn tocease forever more thinking like a Negro and acting like a Negro. This willnot be easy for him. His burden will be that, because of his race and color,it will not suffice for him to think and act like just any white man. Hemust think and act like the best among white men. Because where the whiteman, because of his race and color, can practice morality and rectitude juston Sunday and let the rest of the week go hang, the Negro can never let upnor deviate. That is our job here in the South. It is possible thatthe white race and the Negro race can never really like and trust eachotherthis for the reason that the white man can never really know theNegro, because the white man has forced the Negro to be always a Negrorather than another human being in their dealings. And therefore the Negrocannot afford, does not dare, to be open with the white man and let thewhite man know what he, the Negro, thinks. But I do know that we in theSouth, having grown up and lived among Negroes for generations, are capablein individual cases, of liking and trusting individual Negroes, which theNorth can never do because the northerner only fears him. So we alone can teach the Negro the responsibility ofpersonal morality and rectitude, either by taking him into our whiteschools, or giving him white teachers in his own schools, until we havetaught the teachers of his own race to teach and train him in these hard andunpleasant habits. Whether or not he ever learns his ABCs or what to do withcommon fractions won't matter. What he must learn are the hardthingsself-restraint, honesty, dependability, purity, to act not even aswell as just any white man, but to act as well as the best of white men. Ifwe don't, we will spend the rest of our lives dodging among the five hundredunbridled horses. We will look forward each year to another Clinton orLittle Rock, not only further and further to wreck what we have so farcreated of peaceful relations between the two races, but to be internationalmonuments and milestones to our ridicule and shame. And the place for this to begin is Virginia, the motherof all the rest of us [through] the South. Compared to you, mycountryMississippi, Alabama, Arkansasis still frontier, still wilderness.Yet even in our wilderness we look back to that mother stock as though itwere not really so distant and so far removed. Even in our wilderness theold Virginia blood still runs, and the old Virginia namesByrd and Lee andCarterstill endure. There is no family in our wilderness but has that oldaunt or grandmother to tell the children as soon as they can hear andunderstand, "Your blood is Virginia blood, too. Yourgreat-great-great-grandfather was born in Rockbridge or Fairfax or PrinceGeorge, Valley or Piedmont or Tidewater," right down to the nearestmilestone, so that Virginia is a living place to that child long before heever heard or cares about New York or, for that matter, America. So let it begin in Virginia, toward whom the rest of usare already looking as the child looks toward the parent for a sign, asignal where to go and how to go. A hundred years ago the hot-heads ofMississippi and Georgia and South Carolina would not listen when the motherof us all tried to check our reckless and headlong course. We ignored youthen, to all our grief. Yours more than any since you bore more of thebattles. But this time we will hear you. Let this be the voice of thatwilderness, speaking not just to Mother Virginia but to the best of herchildrensons found and chosen worthy to be trained to the old pattern inthe University established by Mr. Jefferson to be not just a dead monumentto, but the enduring fountain of his principles of order within the humancondition and the relationship of man with manthe messenger, the mouthpieceof all, saying to the mother of us all, "Show us the way and lead us in it."Ibelieve we will follow you. Mr. Faulkner is good enough toanswer any questions that you care to raise. You don't have to take issue withthe very fine sentiments just expressed.Sir, you spoke of the Negro as achild, more or less, who had to be taught how to live likelike the best whiteman, [but do you think that] before that that thewell,the[awful lot of this trouble that's been caused for colored peopleare by irresponsible white people]? Don't you think it would be agood idea to educate the white people to accept the Negro? Yes, I do. Of course, this could go into great length. I was simplystating the proposition in its simplest terms, as it seemed to me. I think thatall that don't violently repudiate what I've said will agree that the whiteman is responsible for the Negro's condition, the fact that the Negro does actlike a Negro and can live among us and be irresponsible, that the white man hasgot to be himself capable to teach the Negro to be more responsible than he is.Yes, I agree with you. But then, the Negro is not going to wait right now whilethe white man educates himself in order to educate the Negro. We've got to doboth at the same time. The Negro is not going to wait any longer. Sir, in your talk you had an analogy comparing the Negro withwithunbridled horses. If you tried to break these unbridled horses, and you turned alot of tame ones in, don't you think it's a possibility that you may wind upwith just a big group of half-wild horses?  Well, of course, I used the horse as as a quick analogy tostate a condition. What I meant by that was, the horse that can be trainedand maybe has been trainedwe'll assume that while that horse was a slave,thenthen he was a docile, well-behaved horse. But then he wasthe burden ofslavery was lifted from him, and he was suddenly freed. That he is still capableof being a docile member of society, but the condition in which he was compelledto be a docile member is gone, and so we will have to establish a new conditionin which he is docile not through pressure, but because he himself wants tobe. He has got to be taught that it's best for me to pull my share in thetraces if that's what we've got to do, than to run wild. don't you feel thatif Virginia did integrate, that the people in Mississippi and Alabama andArkansas and those places would sort of lose their respect for Virginians asSoutherners and sort of classify them as sort of northerners?  No, sir, I do not. There's a noisy minority in Mississippi andArkansas, andand I rather think it's in Virginia too, that will go to anylength before they willwill risk in any way improving the Negro's classcondition, for economic reasons. That'sthat's what's so in Mississippi, anyway. Butthere are people in Mississippi and in Alabama and in Georgia, in the middleofofof where the Ku Klux Klan and Citizens Councils are active, that dobelieve that whether they like it or not, there's a situation now whichsimply will not go on any longer, and our choice is either to do nothing and berun over andand trampled, or take ourselves, try to take charge of theseunbridled horses. And I think that if the people in Mississippi and Arkansasand Alabama could find that there were people in Virginia that would take thelead in this, they would follow for the reason that there is a respect, afeeling of veneration toward Virginia that exists, as I tried to explain,everywhere in the rest of the South. Whether it'sit's valid or not, I don'tknow, and from some of the things that I have seen Virginia do since I've beenhere, I may agree that it's not too valid, but I think that basically there isthat feeling, and I believe that there is in Virginia the capacity to take thefirst step in solvingsolving this problem, and if it is taken in Virginia, thepeople in Mississippi and Alabama will follow when they wouldn't follow Alabamanor Mississippi.There's someone over here.  on the subject of race relations, it seems to me that thecontinuum in the United States is one of polarity, that is, the only viewtolerated is anis the extreme view. If you agree with that premise of mine,would you say that there will be resurgencea resurgence of a moderate view onthis subject, and what is your conception of that view? I would say that the Negro doesn't want to mix with white people anymore than white people want to mix with the Negro. The Negro simply wants theright himself to decide not to mix. I think that he doesn't want to goto white schools just because they're white schools. I think he wants to go tothem because he's under the delusion that white schools are good schools.I think fromfrom what I've seen of a lot of schoolsthat no really industrious Negro would want to go to one. Now that's not true ofall schools, butbut it's true of too many white schools. I think that what hewants is mainly the chance himself to decide to be segregated, and that if hehad that, with schools so good that the people in the schools would be too busypassing the work to care what color who's sitting next to them was, therewouldn't be any trouble about integration in schools. Sir, would you consider one of the problems[disregarding thatyou mentioned that the Negro was fighting for the chance to be able tosegregate himself]is it not true that that is what the whitesoutherner is fighting to maintain? In other words, if the Negro is fighting forthe right of association, aren't the southerners fighting for the equivalentright to disassociate? In other words, they don't feel like sacrificing theirrights completely in order for the Negro to achieve the same rights. In otherwords, they don't feel that they are balanced. Do you think that is a validcause for the southern white to be fighting so strenuously to preserve hisequivalent right of disassociation? I would say it's valid assuming that the southerner's fear is valid. Ithink that his violent attitude toward integration is based in fear. It'sinMississippi, it's mainly an economic fear, that he has trained the Negro toget along withwith inferior tools and bad stock and yet to make a living and send his children to school. The white man is afraid that if the Negro hasbetter tools and better stock, the Negro will take the white man's economy awayfrom him. I think he is afraid that if he gives the Negro a chance to choose tobe segregated, the Negro may not choose it, that if he was just convincedthat the Negro would want to keep his own churches and his own schools andnot mix with white people, then the white man would give him that chance, but Idoubt if some of the white people in the South can ever be brought to takethat chance.  I believe you inferred in the earlier part of your speechthat a good deal of the prejudice is against the Negro because of his color, andif that be so, I wonder if you really think that integration is going to solvethis prejudice? I myself think that integration as they mean it now willwill neveroccur, that the Negro doesn't want it either. I would say, though, inin fivehundred years he will have vanished, and I imagine then anyone that wants tojoin the D.A.R. will have to prove that she's got somewhere a strain ofNegro blood, that they'll be descendantsof,but asI think as the NAACP preaches it, and asthe White Citizens Councils preach against it, itit won't occur because theNegro himself, as a race, doesn't want to mix with white people. He don't likewhite people that well. But I do think that all the laws in the world are notgoing to make the two races mix if they don't want to, just as all the lawsin the world won't keep them apart if they do want to. Virginia, and I think several other Southern states, have laws which saythat in case schools are mixed with colored and white, these schools will beclosed. Do you think that when these schools are closed, the communities willfinally come about to deciding that it's better to integrate and educate, orjust do away with education? I think they will come around to integrate for the reason that we have made our schools in this country to a sort of a national system ofbabysitters, and by the time these children have been at home underfoot the parents are going to be willing for them to goto school no matter who else is there.  Sir, what specific program would you advocate to implement this educationof the Negro race? I would say first to raise the standard of all the schools to the best.I would let everyone that can pass the board go to that school. He might haveone chance to fail. If he fails, he goes to a trade school. If he fails there,he goes to the Army. [audience laughter, applause, and conversation] I mean by that that education should be a privilege. It shouldn't be a dutythat I'm made to do by law whether I want to or not. That is, the law can makeme go to school, but they can't make me do anything there I don't want to. Itshould be a privilege. People should be willing to walk four or five miles toget to school. Do you agree with the administration's proposal for federal aid to theschools? Yes, if the standards of the schools were improved. I think thatmore money ain't going to improve the schools, that the schools themselves aregoing to have to begin to improve themselves. They're going to have to get ridof a lot of people that don't have any business in school. They've got to giveteachers better pay and give the teacher some pride in his job and some securitythat nobody willwill fire him. But, yes, itfederal aid willwill have to go tothe schools because I think the communities can't oror won't. I'm sorryAnd at what age do you advocatethis entrance examination for studentselementary school or high school? That shouldI should think the entrance examination would come only togive the failure a second chance, that he can go to school as he does now. Thefirst time he fails, he goes to a trade school, but he will have the right toswot up and take an entrance examination to get back into the grade that hehelost. I think that at college it should be a board, yes. That no matter whatcredits he brings from his school he should pass a board examination to get intocollege, yes. Yes.Sir, do you think that the federal government will allow the Negro tomake this choice that you're talking about? The federal government, I imagine, will do whatever the most folkshollering the loudest at it insist on.  It seems like the various groups up North which are pushing integrationso hard now willshould the South try to adopt this voluntary segregationleavetheboth the white and black alone then to make that choice, or do you thinkit's sort of wrapped up inin power politics from the large northern cities,that we are going to continue to be the whipping boy, for better or worse? I think that most of the noisy vociferous people in the North don'treally know what they're talking about. If they would come down here and look atit, they would know a good deal more than they do now. And I think that they aregoing to learn, because there are more and more Negroes moving to the North. Inmy county there were 6,000 people moved out since the last sentencecensus.There weresomething like 4,800 of them werewere Negroes. I was through thecountry last winter bird-shooting. I would see houses empty, house after house.One family on my place gone to Chicago. How long they'll stay, I don't know. Iimagine they'll be back in a year, but they'veAnd I think when more and more of these people begin to crowd in among thewhite folks in the North, a lot of them that talk so loud now will begin tochange their tune. Sir, if the Negroes are the wild horses which you imply they are, how arethey to pass the entrance exams? It seems to me they'll all end up in the Army,and we'll be right back right where we started from.  Well, sir, that was an unfortunate simile, but I used somethingthat we were all familiar with to express quicklya condition in which ten percent of the population werewere not allowed tobe members of the population, except under sufferance. That's all I meant. Ididn't mean that they were horses at all. We could reverse it and say that acommunity of fifty thousand horses with five hundred loose men moving around init, if you like.I simply meant that we havegot toto find somesome mutual ground to meet on, not socially so much aseconomically, andand, of course, that implies education, culture. That is,the Negro can be equal without having to come in and sleep withyou.  it seems that the need by the early first colonies, theneed for an agrarian society to have labor, gave birth to this great problem,and it also seems that the continual effort and attempt to maintain the societyeven after 1865 has prolonged and added to the problem. Do you think, and thisis my question, that the advent of industry in the South, the industrializationof the South, and the possible eventual destruction of the remainingof theagrarianagrarian society will have any effect upon this problem?  and the possible eventual destruction of theremainingof the agrarianagrarian society will have anyeffect upon this problem? It will in that, I thinkthe agrarian culture was the only culture thewhite man went to much trouble to train the Negro in. As thatvanishes, the Negro becomes more and more of a problem. When that's completelygone, he will be still more and more of a problem, and for that reasonthe white man will have to do something to substitute that agrarianeconomy, which took care of the Negro. I mean byby "tookcare," which assimilated the Negro. The Negro had a definite placein that economy. Now the only contact the Negro has with the white man's cultureis the time-payment icebox andand the automobile that he'll own someday, if he don't tear it up before he finishes paying for it,but there's no other contact with the white man'sculture that the Negro has since he wassince he left the agrarianeconomy of slavery. I'd like to probereally, question, your statement, that no nation can existwith second-class citizens. I'm not aware of any civilization either ancient ormodern that has not, in some form, had a second-class citizenry. For example,the Hellenic civilization probably reached its flower because the leisureofof one class was made possible by the labors of ones who were notonly second-class citizens, but worse. I'm not defending second-classcitizenship, but it seems that some civilizations exist not only in spite of itbut, in fact, because of the second-class citizenship. So I would like to knowif there is historical precedent for your statements.This: I don't know any of those civilizations that have not had asecond-class citizenship, but I don't know of any of them in which thatsecond-class citizenship was an arbitrary condition compelled on thesecond-class citizen by the others. He found his own second-class level. He wasnot compelled to it by the color of his skin. If that second-class citizen couldrise fromfrom his second-class citizenship, he washe wasallowed to. There was nothing to stop him. In our economy it's pretty hard forthe Negro to get very far. That's the only difference. In Egypt many thousands and tens of thousands and hundreds of thousandsof workers that were held in slavery, and they could not get out of it. those people . True, but some of them broke out. You know, Moses led a big gang of themout himself. [audience laughter and talking][audience talking][I think as you were talking, you're taking as the bestman being][and since][activities, eventually takingand taking] interest in whatwe're doing a while voting, you want the best way of educating people whoare thinking about the [unity, not only themselves]. Don't you thinkthat there should be a great attempt to encourage the Negro [to voteas] much as possible in the South and to think of what he's doing,rather than going to [practically] every means to discouragehim as at present? Well, sir, inin principle, yes, but I think that to give a man a vote whenhe has no conception of what he's voting for or against is not going to improvehim nor his condition much. I still think that the education should come first,but then I agree that a lot of white folks that vote haven't got any businessvoting, too,but just because they do vote,it's not going to help things to give a lot of Negroes that haven't got anybusiness voting the right to vote. I think that if we've got tostart educating somebody somewhere, then let's start withwith what isamenable to it, and the Negroin his present condition he wants to advancehimself. He would be more amenable to education than the white man would becausethe white man has got spoiled by it. The white man says, "My laws make me go toschool, and if itI've got to have a good school that suits me. I'vegot to have a good football team, or I ain't going there. I've got to havecheerleaders or I may not like it." The Negro, I think, anxious to better hisconditionand I hope that some of his leaders tell him it can be doneonly by educationmight be more amenable to education, to realize theresponsibility that he has when he has the right to vote.Sir, do you think that the integration policies in the North have beensuccessful, and if not, why? [audience talking] Well, probably no integration policies have been successful, but thenmost of the agrarian policies have not been too successful, yet somehowagriculture advances, somehow thethe human condition inwhich Negroes and whites have to live has advanced slowly. It has gone backwardsince that Supreme Court decision, but since '65, it had advanced gradually andsteadily, and I think that it will continue to advance graduallygraduallyand steadily. Sir, before you made the statement that the northerners were afraid ofthe Negro. What are your reasons for that? That conclusion['s] drawn fromfrom the experience I'vehad with the northerners. Theytheythey love the Negro intheory, but they don't want much to do with him. I've noticed that thesoutherner, hehe don't love the Negro in quantities, but he willdefend some particular Negro. It may be thenigger just owes him moneybut anyway,whatever the reason is, he will defend him. Andthat's what I meant. I simply generalized from what I've heard northerners say.Theytheythey express so many, to me, bizarre reasons forthe Negro's desire to advance himself. They seem to thinkthat he'swants to take revenge on long oppression fromthe white race. That may be true inin certain cases, but I think ingeneral the Negro don't especially want revenge on the white man,that his attitude toward the white man is something like thewhite man's toward him. He likes a few of them, but he don't think much of allof them.But his low opinion of all of them isnot worth going to a great deal of trouble to get revenge. [Sir, I don't mean] to suggest that I'm a northerner, butwe often say that the [northernerought to] come down and see how things are going on, and we oftensay that they don't understand our problems, yet we in the South have anopportunity to do something progressive, and I don't think that any of ourleaders have ever come up with a good working plan yet. What do you think aboutthat? I agree with you.That's what I'mtalking about tonight. I agree with you. But then, I don't know of anyofof the northerners that have come up with a good practical workingplan yet. Sir, as I understand it, you believe that much of the leadership problemthat we've got today is caused by an active noisy minority in each state, and ifso, if I've understood you correctly, I wonder what your reasons are forbelieving, for thinking, or for wondering why the hapless majority refrains orkeeps from using their numerical superiority to overcome this leadershipproblem. Well, one reason is they don't want to be mixed up in somethingunpleasant. Another reason is that people that compose that noisymajorityminorityin Mississippi, anyway, if you saysomething or do something they don't like, they may set your house on fire.Sir, if Virginia's plea for moderation was ignored once before withparticularly disastrous consequences to her, as you mentioned before, do youthink there's much hope for Virginia particularly caring to take the lead in theSouth on this question? It seems to me she should. It seems to me that Virginiashould feel something of the same responsibility toward the other states of theSouththat the Virginia younger sons moved into with the surplusslaves two hundred years agothat the father might feel toward hissons. It's aI would say maybe the strongest tie would be some tie,anan attenuation, but still intact, of blood, of culture, of thought,of having shared inin the same disasters. I thinkit'sthere's a definite tie. I think that Virginia,that what we'll, if you'll allow me, the soul of Virginia feels the same tietoward Mississippi and Alabama and Georgia as the soul of Mississippi andAlabama feel and ofofof respect toward themother stock in Virginia. I think that that'sthat's ananactual condition. Sir, in the Deep South, Mississippi and Alabama, the people seem to becontrolled, more or less, by the Ku Klux Klan. You mentioned the houseburningsand stuff like that. And do you think any examples that we set or any reasons wegive, are going to break through thosethose members of the Ku Klux Klan who arebacked, in a lot of cases, by the law enforcement agencies, whoareare pretty ignorant, a lot of them? Do you think that we can doanything to break through their attitude? I think so. That's the point I make. Ifif there was adefinite quality ofof leadership in common sense, apart from emotionand any dragging out of old battle flags, that the South, the wilderness, thefrontier part of the South, could hear and know about, they would havesomesome reason to feel that if we can throw off thesethese noisy people, too, that there are people in other parts of the South thatfeel as we do. Thethe liberal in Mississippi, he's hemmed in more orless by the sort of people that burn crosses andand whip Negroes andcompose lynching parties, and he's afraid to say anything. Well, he knows thatif he says too much, something unpleasant may happen to him. Then no matter whathe says it may not do any good. But if he found out that there were people inother states that felt the same way as he does, just as the peoplethat form Citizens Councils and the KKK, they find out that thereare people in other states that feel the same way, so it buildsthem up. I think that's what we need. The people that will lookon this as something that is going to change, whether we like it ornot. It may be that all of us curse the day when the first slavewas sold into this country, but that's too late now. And to live ininthis country, anywhere in the world today, and toto be against givinga man what equalitycultural, educational, economicthathe's capable and responsible for, is like living in Alaska and being againstsnow.You've got snow. It'sit's foolish to be against it.You've got it. Sir, this is just a simple question. I wondered if you could tell us ifthere's any particular class or economic group in the South which the Klan drawsits members from, or whether they come from all walks of life in the South. By and large, they come from the poor unsuccessful whiteman. He hashas worked hard by his lights, and, of course, he hasworked hard.He never gets very far ahead, and he knows that he never will. Hesees the Negro with the same sort of land he's got, with poorer tools and not asmuch credit as he's got, make a better job of it, to raise hisfamily, and they seem to be happier than he does. And hehe doesn'tlike that. He's envious. He hates the Negro because the Negro is beating him athis own poor game, which is to make a living on forty acres of poorland. His only superiority over that Negro is not economic anylonger. It's because he's white, and that Negro's not white, and so he's goingto do everything he can to keep that Negro black, because it makes him feelgood. That's the only thing, the only edge he has.  in the light of what you've just said, you also said thatthe Negro won't wait any longer, and that he will demand rights, and thatthere's not time to educate the white man, but don't you really think thatit'sit is a matter of time and a long time before the Mississippianor the south Alabamian will actually accept any sort of integration [in the South]? Yes, I agree with you. I think it will be at least fifty years.I meant that the Negro is now in motion toward moreequality, and he's got a lot of white folks and government bureaus and courtsbehind him. I didn't mean that he's going togoing to either blow thecountry up or change it tomorrow. I meant that now he has gotpressure, outside forces, helping him move forward, and that is what I thinkwe've got togot to cope with. Either use it, direct it, or let it runover us. But it will be fifty years before, at least, before the integration asthe NAACP talks about it, if that ever does come.But he willit willbe less time than that before he gets more equality than he's got. I think it'llbe less time than that before he can vote in Mississippi, or beforehishehe has to pay the same interest on his borrowed moneythe white man does, that a white man can't cheat him, can't charge things on afarm commissary book and refuse to let the Negro add up the figures, as he cando now in Mississippi. Sir, a lot of southerners argue that complete integration would greatlylower our standards of education, but don't you believe that within a few yearsafter complete integration, if it worked even moderately well, there would be anoverall improvement in our standards of education? I don't know. It seems to me to improve standards of education we've gotto get some folks out of the schools, not get more in it that don't belongthere. Sir, being a liberal in Mississippi, as it seems to me you are, you haveprobably had experiences with this vociferous group that seems to know onlyviolence to accomplish its means. It seems to me that you mighthave had some experience with this group, and my question is, have you, and ifyou have, could you relate what they were? Well, quite often, as individuals they areare not toodangerous. They're just noisy. When enough of them get together, they canusually be handled as those North Carolina Indians got rid of theirs.That a little firmness will do a lot with them.Of course, that don't keep them from coming around at night and setting fire tothe barn. That's just an occupational hazard you've got to live with.  Since you say Virginia must take the first step, how would you proposethis, especially since the administration has closed the door as far aseducation is concerned? Well, that would be something which Virginians must decide. What I hopeis that Virginia will say, "Something has got to be done about this, and youpeople in Mississippi and Alabama and Georgia, let's decide what to do, eitherto control it or let it run over us."We did have a vote here, though, sir, and [whether itwas] overlookedthe Gray Planjust a start inthe right direction.  Well, the only answer to that is to vote again, and vote again,and vote again. If you tell people somethingoften enough and long enough, whether they believe you or not, they may followyou just to get you to hush.  Sir, it seems to me that the main contention here tonight is that theeconomic and educational status of the Negro has propagated in him mores whichare detrimental to our society. If this is so, why not, while segregated, raisehis economic standards and raise his educational standards? Good, I agree with you. That's what I'd like to do. Furthermore I would like to givehim such good schools that he wouldn't want to go to the white schools. I wouldlike to give him so much equality in his own race and responsibility for it andmake him have to spend so much time being responsible for his own equality, he wouldn't have time to bother with the white man's. Yes, I agree with you.That's what I would do. Sir, would you advocate letting the Negro pay his own taxes, too? Well, don't he? we know. Well, hesome of him does. He gets drafted into the Army justlike he was a white man. He risks the same death as a white man does. Andprobably, if he had the vote, he'd vote for the same scalawag and scoundrel thewhite folks elect, but he would at least have the have the right to have voted for him.Sir, assuming that we in Virginia take the initiative to lead in thisintegration movement for the South, what guarantee, if any, do we have thatincidents similar to those that just happened in New York in the last couple ofweeks won't happen again down here? If we don't have any guarantee, what stepswould you suggest that we take to stall off any such incidents? Particularly, the knifing and robberies and so forth. I would say that we train the Negro first into the responsibility ofhaving the privilege of going to the white school before we dump him into it,that he should bebe selected by rigorous examination before he waspermitted into the white schools. In the meantime, white teachers should be sentto the Negro schools to train the Negro teachers how to teach the Negro[students] to be equal, responsible for the right to go tothe white schools. I think if that'sI'm sure what we all want not tohappen is a thing like Little Rock or Clinton, to have troops with bayonetscompel Negroes into white Virginia or Mississippi schools. That's exactly, as Isee it, what we're trying to prevent, which isif we don't dosomething, we will have.  the Negro professional men of the Southitsdoctors, [in particular,] and the lawyersthemselvesact as a blockade against the younger, the better-educated Negroes. In importantmatters, inmedical societies, they won't let them passthe board examinations, so what are we going to do about that? [Youhave] these old guard Negroes who won't let the new,better-educatedthe more liberal Negroes in as leaders. They will have to be bypassed, just like the old-guardwhite people that want to stop progress will have to be bypassed.We don't have time, any more, to wait around for the old mossbacksto die off.That might solve it if we had moretime, but we don't. Something's got to be done pretty soon, and they would haveto be bypassed. And I'm quite sure there's a lot of that, that they prefer thestatus quo, they don't want to change and upset things, that probablytheythey don't want a lot ofof smart young Negro doctorsand lawyers getting in their hair. It makes them behave a good deal like whitefolks.   as a foreigner, I have regarded the southerners and thenortherners, all Americans, as members of the Americannation, but here and elsewhere, I have observed that there is a differencebetween the southerner and the northerner. I see a problem here whichseems to me greater or more dangerous than the problem of segregation againstthe Negroes. Would you please comment? I think I understand what you mean, but I don't believe any problem canface this country that we won't drop everything and confederate on, unless itmay be the abolishment of automobiles.But weare not going to confederate on the problem of segregation. That's the onlyissue that wewe balk at.But anything else isephemeral, and theand the American don't take that seriously any morethan he takes most of theof the stuff he talks seriously, that agreat deal of his talk that sounds serious and meaningful to the foreigner, itdon't to the American because heit never occurs to him that anybody'sgoing to really believe that, but one or two more, Mr. Faulkner? Whateverwhatever you ever like.Let's give them about two or three more and then . If we haveabout two more questions, and then I think we've held Mr. Faulkner longenough. I think this last comment is of some interest, and I was wondering if youfelt that the problem which we face in Virginia and in the South has any stronginternational consequences insofar as the future of the Western civilization.That is, what do our neighbors across the oceans think of us in Virginia, let'ssay, as this young man has just pointed out, when they observe our actions inregard to Negroes? I imagine that they have a veryprettya very pooropinion of us, but I think that their opinion of us is not near as importantright now as whatwhat, weVirginians and Mississippians andAlabamianshave got to think about ourselves. Let's look after our ownopinion about our behavior, and then let's worry about what somebody else thinksabout it.As slow and as inefficient as it may be, do you feel that the bestproblem or the best solution to race integration would be race assimilation? No, sir, I don't think that that wouldwould solve manyproblems. The same amount ofof bickering would go on, and they wouldfind another subject for it. I think that the only thing that will solve thatproblem is not integration but equality, for the Negro to know thathe has just as much and just as valid rights in this country as anybody elsehas. That his money is just as secure. His children have a right to just as goodan education as anybody else does. His vote counts as much as anybody else's.That he don't have to pay any more for the Cadillac that he dreams of owningsome day than the white man has to pay for it.I know I'm speaking for each one of us when I say we're all mostgrateful to Mr. Faulkner for a very interesting and a very stimulating evening.That concludes this evening.   one of your novels, Requiem for aNun, has been adapted to the theater and was successfully presented inParis and England. Do you feel others of your works might be successfullydramatized, too, and do you plan to do it? I don't know. I don't know too much about theater. I wrote that book asa play. It wasn't adapted. There were sections of ititthe story fell into threeacts told in dramatic form. It wasI think played that way. Therewere no adaptations and no changes. Of course, there may have been some changeswhen Albert Camus got hold of it in Paris. He turned it into an existentialistjob, but he didn't change it too much. I think the versioninin London was about as I wrote it, but it was writtenin that form. I felt, at the time, that that was the most effective way to tellthe story I was trying to tell. I think that's one of the tools ofthe writer's craft, that he is at liberty to use whatever methodhe thinks does the job best.  Oh, yes. Of course, you've got to define what you mean by experience. Ifyou restrict experience to what you yourself have done, thatis a limited field, and you would have only a limited field towrite from. Toto me, experience is anything that youhave perceived. It can come fromfrom books.A book thatastory that is true enough and alive enough to move you, that, in myopinion, is your experience, is one of your experiences. You neednot to do the actions that the people in that book do, but if theystrike you as being true, that they are things that people would do, that youcan understand the feeling behind them that made them do that, then that's anexperience to me. And so, in my definition of experience, youit'simpossible to write anything that is not an experience, because everything youhave read, have heard, have sensed, have imagined is a part ofexperience. That is, I think, there's as much of memory in the nervesand the muscles as there is in the gray matter. I have a questionsort of along these lines. It's a littlelong,I hope you'll bear with me.Go slow with it [so I won't miss it].I certainly will. As background on it, Mr. Gwynn asked us towrite an outline of a novel that we wanted to write last semester. It was quitea difficult task, for me at any rate, and here it is the question which comesout of that attempt to write that outline. I sometimes think that the writer whotells the truth has an almost insurmountable problem. First, he must know whatand how other people think, and second he must record what he knows in his artisticcreation. If you agree with this premise, which part of the writer's task isthe more difficult: knowing a character, that is what he believes and how hereacts to the situations and so forth, or once you know it, getting it down onpaper? Now there's another case where we've got to define terms. In my opinion,truth don't have very much relation to facts, that some things you imagine oryou hear, you know is true. Maybe it ain't so, but it should be so. That to meis truth. Now, give me the second half of your question again.Well, the second half, asas I look at the problem of writing the novel is,once you have your character in [mind], then getting him downon paper, telling about the character, describing his thoughts or his opinionsor how he reacts under pressure or his philosophy, is getting that downthat'sthe, I suppose, the mechanical part.Now what to me is, first, youknow your character, and you know what he's like. You know him, and then youhave to put him down onon the paper as you're writing, and I waswondering if that is the sort of the way you approach a novel, which it probablyis not, but if it is, which would you say is the hardest of the twoproblems: to get your character in your mind or to get him down on paper onceyou have him in your mind? I would say to get the character in your mind. Once he is in your mind,and he is right, and he's true, then he does the work himself. All you need todo then is to trot along behind him and put down what he does and what he says.It's the ingestion and then the gestation. You've got to know thecharacter. You've got to believe in him. You've got to feelthat whatthat he is alive, and then, ofcourse, you will have to do a certain amount ofof picking andchoosing among the possibilities of his action, so that his actions fit thecharacter which you believe in. After that, thethebusiness of putting him down on paper is mechanical. It'sI think, most ofthe writing has got to take place up here before you ever put thepencil to the paper.But the character's got to be true by your conception andby your experience, and that would include, as we've just said, what you'veread, what you've imagined, what you've heard, all that going to giving youthe gauge to measure this imaginary character by, and once he comes alive andtrue to you, andand he's important and moving, then it's not too muchtrouble to put him down.I think my question follows a little bit fromthat one. I was wondering, to what extent[is] the creative literary process really sometimespainful, and if facility in writing necessarily goes withexcellence or the other way around. And if it's too difficult, does it appear tothe reader as being labored andand worked over? Sometimes, probably. I think ofof so much of Dreiser, thatmust've been a terrific anguish to him to write. I can think ofwell,Flaubert, say, that sounds so easy, so simple, that must havebeen a terrific effort to him, too. Probably you can'tcan't drawanyany generalgeneralization from that. Now, what was thequestion about the the anguish and trouble. We almosttouched on that. Tell me that again, the first of your question wasI just wanted to know to what extent [that in] the creative literaryprocess is or can be expected to be? Well, it's anything that you like to do better thananything else, of course you're willing to make sacrifices for, and usually thethings that you like to do are troublesome. That is, if you like to ski,that'sthat's difficult. Everybody can't do it. But if you like itwell enough, that very anguish is fun. You do it because that gives you morepleasure than anything else you can think of. It may be difficult, just likemountain climbing. Nobody would climb mountains just for fun. People don't knowwhy they climb mountains, but that's their cup of tea they like. I think that'strue of the writer, that he'she's willing to face theanguish and the trouble of it becauseone reason is he can't help it,hehis choice is either to write or not write, and hesays, "Well, I'm going to write anyway." The other is to have done the job well,then he hashas been repaid for the trouble and the suffering, we'llcall it, that he went through. Also, he has justified the fact that people mustsuffer. There's really no good reason why there should be pain, you know.There's no biological reason for it, and yet we constantly suffer pain and fearand if the individual can make something whichwhich makes him feelgood, that this is something that wasn't here before me, and I've made it, andit'sit's not quite good enough, but it's the best I can do, and I hada good time at it, then that is his pay for it.This sort of relates to the question before that, but when you arewriting a novel about a particular group of people and a particular environment,just to what extenthow fully do you imagine these people and thisenvironment beyond what actually goes into the novel? I think one of the first qualities a writer must have isan inherent incapacity to stick to the truth,that he willwill takecharacters, situations he has seen with the best intention in the world, butdespite himself, he cannot stick to that. He's going to improve it somehow. He'strying to make something a little new, a little different than what was herebefore, and he's not going to worry too much about whether he sticks to thetruth, and he finds that he's got away from fact, I mean, not the truth, whichis as I just said, there's not too much relation between fact and truth. When hefinds that he has got away from fact, he doesn't worry about that. Because hehas dedicated himself to stick to truth, as he sees it. I mean, by truth,the things which move people. Thethedesires, the passions in the human heart, the things that the human heartconsiders importanthonor and truth, shame, baseness,couragethat's what he's writing about, and when he's gotto ignore fact to do that better, then he won't hesitate to ignorefact, because he's not really interested in facts. Fact can change too much. Factcan be one thing today and something else tomorrow. A posted sign can change afact, you know, but it can't change the truth.I think some magazines pay more for humorous stories than they do forstories of a more serious nature, at least I've heard a number of writers saythat in relation to The New Yorker, supposedly becausehumor is harder to write thanhumorous stories are harder to writethan serious ones. Do you find that true in your writing, that it's harderfor you to write a funny scene, a humorous scene, than it is to write one of aserious nature? With me, the character does the work, and so I couldn't say that it'smore difficult to write a funny story than a sad one.That I think the writer ismainly not writing a story. He's writing about people. He thinks of thecharacter. He gets that character from observation, from experience, fromimagination, and suddenly that character himself or herself turns out to befunny, and then she says and does funny things. I think maybe what you mightcall a professional writer that has a knack forcomposition, for knowing what magazines will pay the best price for and has thetalent to write something to fit that, now he may be able to answerthat question better than me, but I think I've found it more satisfactory towrite mainly about people and let the character himselfif he's comic, then hedoes and says comic things, and I don't think I would worry too much aboutthat.  you've stated that your method of composition is just tolet the story write itself.And I was wondering if you could tell us whether or not Sherwood Andersonwrote in [asimilar to] this fashion. I think so, yes. Hewriting was very difficultfor him because he took it up late in life and contrary to his tradition and histraining. He had been successful in the ordinary shape of theAmerican dream, which was to come from nothing andand by your ownshrewdness and skill make something of yourself and establish a certain positionin the community. Then suddenly he decided he wanted to be a writer, and he, athis age, hehe was thinking always, "Well, now am I good enough to be awriter? Is this a mistake? Maybe rather than to try to be a writer and fail, Ishould've stuck to what I had trained myself to do," and he himself didn't havethe confidence in what he did. It would be other people that would say, "Well,this isthis is splendid. This is marvelous. Few people can matchthat." He never did quite believe that. He was afraid that somebody might comealong and say, "This is nonsense, it's trash." And if someone had, he would'vebelieved that, that he himself didn't have the confidence in what he did or inthe doing of it, which the person that begins to write, to want to be a writeryoung has. When you're young, you know nothing. You believe that you can climb amountain or can fly an aeroplane faster or ride a racehorse than anybody elsecan. You're not afraid to try anything.But in his case, hehe wasafraid. Did that answer the question or did it get away from the question?Well, I don't know. ItI thought it was very interesting. I don't knowwhether exactly was the thing I was Well, let's have your question again. I got off myself. That's myfault.I wasjust wanted to know if he wrote in the same fashion youdid. You said that you just let the story write itself, and I was wondering ifhe did the same thing. Yes, andgenerally, yes. I think that all people writefrominby the same method. It's a matter ofofimagining any number of things. The writer at the moment of putting it down hasgot to be a censor, to say, "Now, this isthis is right, this is wrong,"and to throw away the wrong. Anderson didn't quite have thatconfidence in his own capacity to pick and choose. There was an instinct thatwould save him in the end. A lot ofof the stuff that went intohis stories a man with a heart or mind more sure of himselfwould've stricken out and would've gotten rid of some of the senseof fumbling and clumsiness, the heavy-footedness, which was in Anderson'sstories, which he himself didn't like, but in my opinion, it had a great deal todo with making his stories. The very fact that they did sound clumsy andand notquite strained but a little puzzled, that the truth did come out ofofall the heavy-footedness and the fumbling, thewhateverit was that made him go to the length of reducing some of it tothe sort of First Reader statements, gave something tothe final result that no imitator couldcould matchprobably. But it was much more of a unhappy strain to him, that he never gotthe pleasure ofout of writing that a more facilecraftsman could've done. It had nothing to do with the result, of course, but itjust was.  Absolutely, I do. That is why he stopped being a successful advertiserand became an artist. He had absolute confidence in his vision andandknew it was important enough for something to be done about it, for him to tryto tell it, to show to people what he had seen, whichhehe, in my opinion, he did marvelously well, but clumsily.  this is another question about Anderson. One criticsuggested Sherwood Anderson felt a particular kinship to Gertrude Stein. MissStein is spoken of so frequently in connection with the writers of the Twenties,that I would be interested to know whether you recall any discussion by Andersonof her, of her work, and its supposed influence upon himself. Yes, he had the unlettered man's boundless and almostbaseless respect forfor literacy, for education, and shewas an extremely versatile creature that way. She spoke two orthree different languages, and she came from a background of people that tookthe best of education as a matter of course, which he didn't have. Also, she wasone of the few people that he could trust. I mean that when shesaid that what he was doing was good, he never doubted it, becausehe knew that she would never do anything to hurt him. Other people that told himit was good, he never did quite trust. He said, "Wellwell, maybethey'llthey'll do something to hurt me tomorrow. I'm afraid of them." But with her he never was, because he knew that she was awell, youmight say a lady, and wasn'twas never going to hurt him.  do you believe that Sherwood Anderson was too deliberate inhis use of [symbols] or do you believe that some ofhisthese symbols were unconsciously used in Winesburg, Ohio? A little of both. You've got to remember that suddenly at the age ofabout 40 he decided to be a writer. He had to learn a complete new trade with acomplete new equipment, and up to that time, he had probably not thought toomuch about symbolism. He had to teach himself that as he went along.Buthewhat he taught himself, hehe would stop to proveto be sure that it was right, that it was inin accordwith thewith the symbolism ofof the new psychology, whichwas coming along at that time.But he had to teach himself his trade as he wentalong. Yes, I hadhad worked in a New York bookstore. The manager wasElizabeth Prall, a Miss Prall then. Later I heard that she had married Anderson,was living in New Orleans. I happened to be in New Orleans, and I had gone tocall on her, because I wasn't going to bust in on Mr.Anderson without an invitation from him. I didn't think that I would see him atall, that he would probably be in his study working, but it happened that he wasin the room at the time.And we talked, and we liked one another from the start,and it was thisjust the chance that I had gone to call on Miss Prall,that I had known, who had been kind to me when I was a clerk in a book store,that I came to meet him. Well, yes, I had heard of The Double Dealer andthe people there for years. At that time, I went to New Orleans toget a job in a ship and go to Europe. That was why I happened to be in NewOrleans at that time. That I hadn'tit was no pull to be a part of aliterary group, no. That I had felt the pullI think thatany young writers does feel that pull, to be with peoplethat have the same problems andand the same interestsas him, that won't laugh at what he's trying to do, that won'tlaugh atat what he says no matter how foolish it might sound to thePhilistine.But that was the reason I was in New Orleans, was toget a job with a ship. I'd like to follow up your remark about the Philistine for one minute ifI can. During the past hundred years or so, much has been said and written aboutthe gulf between the writer and the other people [of his owntime]. If this gulf and supposed lack of understanding is acertainty between the writer and his time does exist, what would you suggest[are some of its causes]? Probably the writer is just too confoundedly busy with his own privateaffairs to have much time for his contemporary scene, that he's aware of it, buthe ain't too interested in it, that to him, the world is not just A.D. thisparticular year. To him, the world is all man [would call]anguish in the books and the plays and the poems. That's where he lives. He justhappens to have to eat inin 1958, but he don'treally live there.   it's been stated that you regard civilization as evil andnature as good, and in "The Bear," you seem to indicate that the purity ofuntouched nature as opposed to the tainted air that hangs about the humanspoilers of the wilderness, that there is this difference.Is this theresult of a belief that man, if he returns to a natural life, can berejuvenated? No, and if I ever gave that impression in my work, that's not quitetrue. I think that with any writercivilization, his age, his time, isa part of the equipment, the reservoir that he will write from, that that isthe writer, the artist, probably don't think anything is eithergood or bad. It just is, and it's vastly interesting because it moves, and thatis the source and the material from which he's going to try tomake something. It's motion. It's people, no matter whether what they do iscowardly or brave oror a nuisance or diverting or entertaining. It's still motion, and he himself hasn't got time, or inclinationeither, to judge it. I think that anyone who says civilization isbad andand non-civilization is therefore good, and if man could justleave civilization and live in a tree and eat nuts,thathe'd be better off, Isome men might be betteroff with that, but not everybody would. Ifif you like tolive in a tree and eat nuts, then you'd be better off and be happier,but the other people that are just as honorableand just as brave that live in the middle of civilization.But that's all partof the reservoir that you write from. That's part of theexperience, to be in the midst of [it, the] motion.Do you think that Sherwood Anderson could've expanded his Winesburg, Ohio into a series of novels as you've donewith your Yoknapatawpha County people, or do you think that he's necessarilymore limited to a form like the short story? He was, yes, limited to that form, and his tragedy was that he waslimited to that one book, that was truth as he sawit. It was valid, true truth, but he had done it that one time, and he nevercould do it again.Because the truth, it was as though the truth that he wascapable of burst on him like a thunderclap all in one flash, thatthere was nothing to progress from nor toward, that it all happened to him likeaa house falling on him. Sir, many of the characters in Winesburg, Ohio hadthe problem of not being able to communicate with their fellow man, and I thinksome of your characters also seem to have that trouble. Now, you've said thatthe most important thing for man is for him to be able to believe in himself. Doyou believe that before he can believe in himself, he must overcome this barrierof communication [with others]? He would be happier if he could overcome the barrier. I don't believethat the fact that he feels he can't communicate would have anything to do withhis own belief in himself. I don't think that whether the writerbelieves he can't communicate or not, he can and he does. I imagine that there'sreally nobody that doesn't communicate. It may behe'llhehe won't want to, that he'll thinkthat he's sufficient, can be an island to himself, but he can't.Whether he wants to or not, he belongs to mankind, too.And in the very fact ofbelonging to mankind, he communicates with mankind. He may not be able to do itarticulately. He may not have the quality ofofrhetoric, but there'sthere's more to communication than speech, youknow.That's what I meant. I meant just the characters that couldn't seem toget to know people in Winesburg, Ohio. There're quite afew characters in that book that are sort of isolated and frustrated becausethey couldn't seem to get to know other people. I didn't mean [writing or speech]. Oh, I see. I think that was out of Anderson's own nature,that he himself didn't believe that communication was moredifficult. I think maybe that he expected more of people than he ever found inpeople, and these characters in his book, because of what they thought was alack ofan inability to communicate was, they simply couldn't findthethe fine virtues in mankind that Mr. Andersonhimself believed were there. They're not there. Man is capable of anything, ofeverything, but of no particular virtue, no particular evil. He's It gives me a great deal ofpleasure to have Mr. Faulkner in this class, in which we are trying to put downfeelings and thoughts on paper and shaping observation and experience intonarrative and essay. For I don't know of anyone who really understands so wellthe longings and frustrations of human beings, and has demonstrated soconsistently his ability to record this understanding, in what constitutes asort of vision of humanity, in a series of stories and novels that are soremarkably skillfully written. I asked Mr. Faulkner if he would readsomething to us, and he chose a story entitled "Race at Morning." He will readsome portions of it, which will make [make time] connect the whole. After he hasfinished his reading, I hope that you will ask questions on that story and anyother questions that seem appropriate to the occasion.It gives me a great deal ofpleasure to introduce Mr. Faulkner [to this class]. It was jest dust-dark when I seen him, about half aquarter up the river, swimming, jest his head above the water. But I couldsee that rocking chair he toted on it and I knowed it was him, going rightback to that canebrake in the fork of the bayou where he lived all yearuntil the day before the season opened, like the game wardens had give him acalendar, when he would clear out and disappear, nobody knowed where, untilthe day after the season closed. But here he was, coming back a day ahead oftime, like maybe he had gotten mixed up and was using last year's calendar bymistake. Which was jest too bad for him, because me and Mister Ernest wouldbe setting on the horse right over him when the sun rose tomorrow morning.So we et supper and fed the dogs, and then I holp Mister Ernest in the pokergame, standing behind his chair until about ten o'clock, when Roth Edmondssaid, "Why don't you go to bed, boy?" "Or if you're going to set up," Willy Legate said, "whydon't you take a spelling book to set up over? . . . He knows every cussword in the dictionary, every poker hand in the deck and every whisky labelin the distillery, but he can't even write his name. . . . Can you?" he saysto me."I don't need to write my name down," I said. "I can remember in mymind who I am.""You're twelve years old," Walter Ewell said. "Man to mannow, how many days in your life did you ever spend in school?""He ain't gottime to go to school," Willy Legate said. "What's the use in going to schoolfrom September to middle of November, when he'll have to quit then to comein here and do Ernest's hearing for him? And what's the use in going back toschool in January, when in jest eleven months it will be November fifteenthagain and he'll have to start all over telling Ernest which way the dogswent?""Well, stop looking into my hand, anyway," Roth Edmonds said."What'sthat? What's that?" Mister Ernest said. He wore his listening button in hisear all the time, but he never brought the battery to camp with him becausethe cord would of bound to get snagged ever time we run through a thicket.In fact the only time he ever admitted he couldn't hear was when we'd besitting on the horse waiting for me to tell him which way the dogswent. Then it was morning.We et, and set the stand-holder acrossfor Uncle Ike McCaslin to put them on the stands where he thought they oughtto be, because he was the oldest man in the camp. He had been hunting deerin these woods for about a hundred years, I reckon, and if anybody wouldknow where a buck would pass, it would be him. Maybe with a big old bucklike this one, that had been running the woods for what would amount to ahundred years in a deer's life, too, him and Uncle BuckUncle Ike would sholy manage tobe at the same place at the same time this morningprovided, of course, hemanaged to git away from me and Mister Ernest on the jump. Because me andMister Ernest was going to git him.And sho enough, as soon as we come tothe bayou we seen his foot in the mud where he had come up out of the riverlast night, spread in the soft mud like a cow's foot, big as a cow's, big asa mule's, with Eagle and the other dogs laying into the leash rope now untilMister Ernest told me to jump down and help Simon hold them. Because me andMister Ernest knowed exactly where he would bea little canebrake island inthe middle of the bayou, where he could lay up until whatever doe or littledeer the dogs had happened to jump could go up or down the bayou in eitherdirection and take the dogs on away, so he could steal out and creep backdown the bayou to the river and swim it, and leave the country like healways done the day the season opened. Which is jest what we never aimed for him to do thistime. So we left Roth on his horse to cut him off and turn him over UncleIke's standers if he tried to slip back down the bayou, and me and Simon,with the leashed dogs, walked on up the bayou until Mister Ernest on thehorse said it was fur enough; then turned up into the woods about half aquarter above the brake because the wind was going to be south this morningwhen it riz, and turned down toward the brake, and Mister Ernest give theword to cast them, and we slipped the leash and Mister Ernest give me thestirrup again and I got up.Old Eagle had done already took off because heknowed where that old son of a gun would be laying as good as we did, notmaking no racket atall yet, but jest boring on through the buck vines withthe other dogs trailing along behind him, and even Dan seemed to know aboutthat buck, too, beginning to souple up and jump a little through the vines,so that I taken my holt on Mister Ernest's belt already before the time hadcome for Mister Ernest to touch him. Because when we got strung out, goingfast behind a deer, I wasn't on Dan's back much of the time nohow, butmostly jest strung out from my holt on Mister Ernest's belt, so that WillyLegate said that when we was going through the woods fast, it looked likeMister Ernest had a boy-size pair of empty overhalls blowing out of his hindpocket. So it wasn't even a strike, it was a jump. Eagle must'a' walked right up behind him or maybe even stepped on him while he waslaying there still thinking it was day after tomorrow. Eagle jest throwedhis head back and up and said, "There he goes," and we even heard the buckcrashing through the first of the cane. Then all the other dogs washollering behind him, and Dan give a squat to jump, but it was against thecurb this time, not jest the snaffle, and Mister Ernest let him down intothe bayou and swung him around the brake and up the other bank. Only henever had to say, "Which way?" because I was already pointing past hisshoulder, freshening my holt on the belt jest as Mister Ernest touched Danwith that big old rusty spur on his nigh heel, because when Dan felt like it hecould go off jest like a stick of dynamite, straight through whatever hecould bust and over or under what he couldn't.The dogs was alreadyout of hearing. Eagle must 'a' been looking right up that big son of a gun'stail until he finally decided he better gitout of there. And now theymust 'a' been getting pretty close to Uncle Ike's standers, and MisterErnest reined Dan back and held him, squatting and bouncing and tremblinglike a mule having his tail roached, until we listened for the shots. Butnever none come, and I hollered to Mister Ernest we better go on while Icould still hear the dogs, and he let Dan off, but still there wasn't noshots, and now we knowed the race had done already passed the standers; andwe busted out of a thicket, and sho enough there was Uncle Ike and Willystanding beside his foot in a soft patch."He got through us all," Uncle Ikesaid. "I don't know how he done it. I just had a glimpse of him. He lookedbig, big as a elephant, with a rack on his head you could cradle a yellin'calf in. He went right on down the ridge. You better get on, too; that HogBayou camp might not miss him." So I freshened my holt and Mister Ernest touched Danagain. The ridge run due south; it was clear of vines and bushes so we couldgo fast, into the wind, too, because it had riz now, and now the sun was uptoo. So we could hear the dogs again any time now as the wind got up; wecould even make time now, but still holding Dan to a canter, because itwas either going to be quick, when he got down to the standers from that HogBayou camp eight miles below ourn, or a long time, in case he got by themtoo. And sho enough, after a while we heard the dogs; we was walking Dan nowto let him blow a while, and we heard them, the sound coming faint up thewind, not running now, but trailing because the big son of a gun had decideda good piece back, probably, to put a end to all the foolishness, and pickedhisself up and soupled out and put about a mile between hisself and thedogsuntil he run up on them other standers from that camp below. I couldalmost see him stopped behind a bush, peeping out and saying, "What's this?What's this? Is this whole durn country full of folks this morning?" Thenhe looked back over his shoulder at where old Eagle and the others washollering along after him while he decided how much time he had to decidewhat to do next.We was in strange country now because we never had to runthis fur before, we had always killed before now; now we had come to HogBayou that runs into the river a good fifteen miles below our camp. It hadwater in it, not to mention a mess of down trees and logs and such, andMister Ernest checked Dan again, saying, "Which way?" I could just barelyhear them, off to the east a little, like the old son of a gun had give upthe idea of Vicksburg or New Orleans, like he first seemed to have, and haddecided to have a look at Alabama; so I pointed and we turned up the bayouhunting for a crossing, and maybe we could 'a' found one, except that Ireckon Mister Ernest decided we never had time to wait.We come to a placewhere the bayou had narrowed down to about twelve or fifteen feet, andMister Ernest said, "Look out, I'm going to touch him" and doneit.  I didn't even have time to freshen my holt when we wasalready in the air, and then I seen the vineit was a loop of grapevine nighas big as my wrist, looping down right across the middle of the bayouand Ithought Mister Ernest seen it, too, and was jest waiting to grab it andfling it up over our heads to go under it, and I know Dan seen it because heeven ducked his head to jump under it. But Mister Ernest never seen it atalluntil it skun back along Dan's neck and hooked under the head of the saddlehorn, us flying on through the air, the loop of the vine gitting tighter andtighter until something somewhere was going to have to give. It was thesaddle girth. It broke, and Dan going on and scrabbling up the other bankbare nekkid except for the bridle, and me and Mister Ernest and the saddle,Mister Ernest still setting in the saddle holding the gun, and me stillholding onto Mister Ernest's belt, hanging in the air over the bayou in thetightened loop of that vine like in the drawed-back loop of a bigrubber-banded slingshot, until it snapped back and shot us back across thebayou and flang us clear, me still holding onto Mister Ernest's belt and onthe bottom now, so that when we lit I would 'a' had Mister Ernest and thesaddle both on top of me if I hadn't clumb fast around the saddle and upMister Ernest's side, so that when we landed, it was the saddle first, thenMister Ernest, and me on top, until I jumped up, and Mister Ernest stilllaying there with jest the white rim of his eyes showing. "Mister Ernest!" I hollered, and then clumb down to thebayou and scooped my cap full of water and clumb back and throwed it in hisface, and he opened his eyes and laid there on the saddle cussing me."Goddawg it," he said, "why didn't you stay behind where you started out?""Youwas the biggest!" I said. "You would 'a' mashed me flat!"   It might 'a' been a signal, a good-by, a farewell.Still walking, we passed the other three old dogs in the middle of theglade, laying down, too; and still that hundred yards ahead of them, Eagle,too, not laying down, because he was still on his feet, but his legs wasspraddled and his head was down; maybe jest waiting until we was out ofsight of his shame, his eyes saying plain as talk when we passed, "I'msorry, boys, but this here is all."Mister Ernest stopped Dan. "Jump downand look at his feet," he said."Nothing wrong with his feet," I said. "It'shis wind has done give out.""Jump down and look at his feet," Mister Ernestsaid.So I done it, and while I was stooping over Eagle I could hear thepump gun go, "Snick-cluck. Snick-cluck. Snick-cluck" three times, exceptthat I never thought nothing then. Maybe he was jest running the shellsthrough to be sho it would work when we seen him again or maybe to make shothey was all buckshot. Then I got up again, and we went on, still walking; alittle west of north now, because when we seen his white flag that second ortwo before the thicket hid it, it was on a beeline for that notch in thebayou. And it was evening, too, now. The wind had done dropped and there wasa edge in the air and the sun jest touched the tops of the trees. And he wastaking the easiest way, too, now, going straight as he could. When we seenhis foot in the soft places he was running for a while at first after hisrest. But soon he was walking, too, like he knowed, too, where Eagle and thedogs was. And then we seen him again. It was the last timeathicket, with the sun coming through a hole onto it like a searchlight. Hecrashed jest once; then he was standing there broadside to us, not twentyyards away, big as a statue and red as gold in the sun, and the sun sparkingon the tips of his hornsthey was twelve of them so he looked like hehad twelve lighted candles branched around his head, standing there lookingat us while Mister Ernest raised the gun and aimed at his neck, and the gunwent, "Click. Snick-cluck. Click. Snick-cluck. Click. Snick-cluck" threetimes, and Mister Ernest still holding the gun aimed while the buck turnedand give us just one long bound, the white underside of his tail like a blaze offire, too, until the thicket and the shadows put it out; and Mister Ernestlaid the gun down slow and gentle back across the saddle in front of him,saying quiet and peaceful, and not much louder than jest breathing, "Goddawg. God dawg."  Then it was morning, tomorrow; it was all over nowuntil next November, next year, and we could come back. Uncle Ike and Willyand Walter and Roth and the rest of them had come in yestiddy, soon as Eagletaken the buck out of hearing and they knowed that deer was gone, to pack upand be ready to leave this morning for Yoknapatawpha, where they lived,until it would be November again and they could come back.So, as soon as weet breakfast, Simon run them back up the river in the big boat to where theyleft their cars and pickups, and now it wasn't nobody but jest me and MisterErnest setting on the bench against the kitchen wall in the sun; MisterErnest smoking a cigara whole one this time that Dan hadn't had no chanceto jump him through a grapevine and bust. He hadn't washed his face neitherwhenwhere that vine had throwed him into the mud. But that was all right, too;his face usually did have a smudge of mud or tractor grease or beard stubbleon it, because he wasn't jest a planter; he was a farmer, he worked as hardas ara one of his hands and tenantswhich is why I knowed from the veryfirst that we would git along, that I wouldn't have no trouble with him andhe wouldn't have no trouble with me, from that very first day when I woke upand maw had done gone off with that Vicksburg road-house feller without evenwaiting to cook breakfast, and the next morning pap was gone, too, and itwas almost night and the next day when I heard a horse coming up and I takenthe gun that I had already throwed a shell into the britch when pap nevercome home last night, and stood in the door while Mister Ernest rid up andsaid, "Come on. Your paw ain't coming back neither.""You mean he give me toyou?" I said."Who cares?" he said. "Come on. I brought a lock for the door.We'll send the pickup back tomorrow for whatever you want." So I come home with him and it was all right, it wasjest fine his wife had died about three years agowithout no women to worryus or take off in the middle of the night with a durn Vicksburg roadhousejake without even waiting to cook breakfast. And we would go home thisafternoon, too, but not jest yet; we always stayed one more day after theothers left because Uncle Ike always left what grub they hadn't et, and therest of the homemade corn whisky he drunk and that town whisky of RothEdmondziz he called Scotch that smelled like it come out of a old bucket ofroof paint; setting in the sun for one more day before we went back home togit ready to put in next year's crop of cotton and oats and beans and hay;and across the river yonder, behind the wall of trees where the big woodsstarted, that old buck laying up inup today in the sun, tooresting today, too,without nobody to bother him until next November.So at least one of us wasglad it would be eleven months and two weeks before he would have to runthat fur that fast again. So he was glad of the very same thing we was sorryof, and so all of a sudden I thought how maybe planting and workingand then harvesting oats and cotton and beans and hay wasn't jest somethingme and Mister Ernest done three hundred and fifty-one days to fill in thetime until we could come back hunting again, but it was something we had todo, to do honest and good during the three hundred and fifty-one days, tohave the right to come back into the big woods and hunt for the otherfourteen; and the fourteen days that the old buck run in front of dogs wasn'tjest something to fill his time until the three hundred and fifty-one whenhe didn't have to, but the running and the risking in front of the guns and dogswas something he had to do for fourteen days to have the right not to bebothered for the other three hundred and fifty-one. And so all the huntingand the farming wasn't two different things at allthey was jest the otherside of each other. "Yes," I said. "All we got to do now is put in that nextyear's crop. Then November won't be no time away.""You ain't going to putin the crop next year," Mister Ernest said. "You're going to school."So atfirst I didn't even believe I had heard him. "What?" I said. "Me? Go toschool?""Yes," Mister Ernest said. "You must takemake something out ofyourself.""I am," I said. "I'm doing it now. I'm going to be a hunter and afarmer like you.""No," Mister Ernest said. "That ain't enough any more.Time was when all a man had to do was just farm eleven and a half months,and hunt the other half. But not now. Now just to belong to the farmingbusiness and the hunting business ain't enough. You got to belong to thebusiness of mankind.""Mankind?" I said."Yes," Mister Ernest said. "Soyou're going to school. Because you got to know why. You can belong to thefarming and hunting business and you can learn the difference between what'sright and what's wrong, and do right. And that used to be enoughjust to doright. But not now. You got to know why it's right and why it's wrong, andbe able to tell the folks that never had no chance to learn it; teach themhow to do what's right, not just because they know it's right, but becausethey know now why it's right because you just showed them, told them, taughtthem why. So you're going to school."  "It's because you been listening to that durn WillLegate and Walter Ewell!" I said."No," Mister Ernest said."Yes!" I said."No wonder you missed that buck yestiddy, taking ideas from the very fellersthat let him git away, after me and you had run Dan and the dogs durn nighclean to death! Because you never even missed him! You neveryou never forgot to loadthat gun! You had done alreadyyou had done already unloaded it a purpose! I heard you!""Allright, all right," Mister Ernest said. "Which would you rather have? Hisbloody head and hide on the kitchen floor yonder and half his meat in apickup truck on the way to Yoknapatawpha County, or him with his head andhide and meat still together over yonder in that [thicket], waiting for nextNovember for us to run him again?" "And git him, too," I said. "We won'teven fool with no Willy Legate and Walter Ewell next time." "Maybe," MisterErnest said."Yes," I said."Maybe," Mister Ernest said. "The best word inour language, the best of all. That's what mankind keeps going on: Maybe.The best days of his life ain't the ones when he said 'Yes' beforehand:they're the ones when all he knew to say was 'Maybe.' He can't say 'Yes'until afterward because he not only don't know it until then, he don't wantto know 'Yes' until then. . . . Step in the kitchen and make me a toddy.Then we'll see about dinner.""All right," I said. I got up. "You want someof Uncle Ike's corn or that town whisky of Roth Edmondziz?""Can't you sayMister Roth or Mister Edmonds?" Mister Ernest said."Yes, sir," I said."Well, which do you want? Uncle Ike's corn or that ere stuff of RothEdmondziz?" Thank you very much, Mr.Faulkner.In writing such a story as that,which must be about concrete things that you've experiencedI don't know whetheryou've had a collision with a grapevine or not when you were on a horsebut doyou see that kind of a story from beginning to end when you start writing? Doyou have that story sort of in mind, the ending as part of thebeginning? No, I think a story like that invents itself as you go along. That onebegan with thewith the picture ofof that little boybeen abandoned byhis mother and his father. They were no good. Andand by rights he should havebeen no good, too. But this man, Mr. Ernest, with all his ignorance, could seethat here is a human being, and a human being is capable of anything if hehas a chance to do it, andand the story came out of the fact that thisthiscrabbed old bachelor would see thisthis waif and suddenly say, He's toovaluable to leave in the woods there. And the story was simply a matter ofshowing incidences to show the relationship between these two people, thatthisthis old man suddenly had seen a duty and was going to do it, that hedidn't knowhe'd probably never been to school himself, but he saw thatsomething could be made out of this waif simply because that little waif was ahuman being.Sir, in [yourown] words, in the beginning we were showing the hunt, the way Mr.Ernest took the boythis was showing how he'she sort of took him in and how hetook him on things that hewent [hunting or things like that]and how hetook him into his life? Yes, and the interdependence. The man was deaf. He couldn't hear whichway the dogs went. This little boy would ride behind him and say, "They went thatway."Well, then couldn't you perhapsput the part toward the end where he took the boy afterhis parents had gone away, first say, and then have the hunt come afterwards,after we know that thethat the man has taken the boy? [Andthen] Could, but I think that my way made a better story.That'sthat's a matter of opinion, but I thinkthat mine, tofor the payoff to come last, was a little more effective. Ifanything, it makes the story seem a little more condensed, shorter maybe.But you had first, inin mind the ending [how itwas]? Yes, yes.When you wrote your Yes. Well, it was the relationship between thesethese two people. Itwas a bizarre relationship. Thethe story itself was simply an inventionofof anecdotes to tell the story, and they come out ofof the storehousewhichwhich any writer has of experience, of observation, of imagination, thathe reaches around in his workbox and picks up whatever plank or board he willneed.You think it is alwaysthe little twist [that] comes from the imagination whichreally makes a kind of a story out of what [is] experienced,that the additional thing which is really not experience which shapes it into some kind of story? I would say so. That that has to be there. It'sit's something ofofofgold inin the imagination which takes the trite, familiar, even dullincident andand givesgives it a shine.One small point, sir. you say a "bayou"? Is that what we who don't live around them call a "bayou"? Yes, they would've said "bayou." When you were talking about the education being so that he could learnnot only what was right, but since he already knew what was right, were youbeingwas that supposed to be sort of comical? No. This uneducated, ignorant man was fumbling after something which hehad realized late in his life was not only true but important. Thatthat no mancan be an island to himself, that you have a responsibility toward mankind. Thatis, you may do right becausethrough instinct, or because it's been beat intoyou, but that may be all right for you, but you have a responsibilitytoward people that have not been trained to do right. They've got to know whythey must do right, and only education can give you thethe rhetoric,thethe capacity to think on your feet, to explain to theto the ignorant, theintractable, why something is right, why he must do something because it'sright. That wasin fact, the association with that child hadhad done that muchto the man. If they hadn't met, the man would have gone on and would have beencontent to be crabbed and ignorant and aa hard farmer, to make a littlemoney every year, but suddenly the responsibility of that childthat man, too,had entered the human race. In a way they werewere to be the salvation of oneanother, mutual salvation of one another. You think then that the boy will go to school? I should think so, yes. He maywill probably never be a Phi Beta Kappa, but this man willwill see that he learnsto read and write andand with the hope, the idea that maybe once he learns toread he will of his own curiosity read enough to learn why man does right,himself.Thethe boy then will be changed by going to school and the man will bechanged also by having the responsibility of this orphan? Well, the man would be changed by the responsibility of the orphan. Thelittle boy, at that age, was pretty well started in the way he would go. All heneeded was just anan occasional prod and some directing, that already hewas truthful andand brave, and he was willing to give devotion,fidelity. All he needed was education, to learn to read, toto know more ofthe history of his race. The man was probably changed more than that little boywas. The little boy was not changed so much as saved. Then were they hunting not only the deer but, in a way, themselves,too? Well, of course, they didn't know that, but that's what they werefinding. That is, the man hadin teaching the little boy thatthatnever to touch satiety was valid. Maybe he had never thought of that before,that his notion was to take the two weeks off and get out there andand killevery deer that got up in front of him, until suddenly his responsibility forthe little boy made him stop and think, Well, what is better, to just drag thedead meat in oror to see the beautiful, splendid creature run its native element? I thought I heard a little bit of a wistfulness for the time when a mandidn't have to do anything but farm and hunt, that maybe thisyou said, "Timewas when all man had to do was farm and hunt." Surely, nobody really likes responsibility. It may be this man hated thefact that he couldn't stay in his home at night and go on to sleep and let thatlittle boy, which he knew was lost and abandoned in ain a hut in the woods,[to] shift for himself, but he couldn't. He had to go and get him. And, yes, heprobably thought it, "I wish we could go on like it used to be, where peopledidn't have to be responsible, where a man could be an island unto himself." Butonce he realized that he couldn't, he realized that neither could this littleboy, neither could any other human being, that the responsibilitythe acceptanceof the responsibility increased all of us, just like the refusal of itdiminished all of us. Sir, would you say that that's a major flaw in your old southernfamilies that you picture, like the Sartorises and the Compsons, that they keep back from  mankind, and they act only for themselves and therefore turn in instead ofout? if you mean by that's true of any family, whetherthey are southern or not. They cling to an obsolescence, whatever that obsolescence might be, yes. And people have a tendency to remember what waspleasant, and the unpleasant part of that vanishes as memory attenuates, so thatall you remember is the happy part of it, and the instinct is to go back to thathappy part. You don't always remember [that] if you went backto the happy part, you'd have to go through with thewith the unhappypart again, too. That's partly clinging to the happy past. It's partly a lackofof something present to occupy. Everybody, in a sense, needs a tubof washing, and the people like the Sartorises and Compsons, they don't have atub of washing anymore. In the storyyour discussion, are you equating havingeducation to book learning? Book learning is a part of education thatI wouldsay if I had to define education, I'd say it's a capacity to increase always,to know more tomorrow than you knew today no matter where you getit from. You might get it fromfrom playing poker or from farming orfrom going to school or from fighting. Book learning, of course, is a part ofeducation, but book learning, to my notion, does not constitute education.It'snothing is of any value if you can't use it. If you can't use it,not so much to make other people better tomorrow, but to make yourself a littlebetter tomorrow than you are, to know more, to be a little wiser, to be moresure ofof your own capacity to be honorable andbrave. [you concede that some] education [happens in theschool]? Oh, yes. Oh, yes.So do you think then by going to schoolif he wanted to justhunt andand farm, do you think he might have gone into something elsenow that he has gone to school and learned ? I doubt it. He would have found out thatwhatMr. Ernest tried to tell him, that to have thetheright, the privilege to do what you want for a fortnight in the year, you've gotto do something for the other 351 days that maybe you won't like,that you have got to teach yourself or be taught discipline, ornothing that you ever acquire will be any good to you if you don't havediscipline. And to go to school at his age was mainly the discipline ofsomething that must be done.Do you mean the process of him going to school isactually inthe subjects that he would be taught he probably wouldn't learn anything thatwould be practical as far as [him making] a livingor That's right. Not until he found out, for instance, that he liked toread. Once you discover you like to read, then nobody really needs to worryabout your book education anymore. You tend to that yourself, unless you want tospecialize [in something]. when you put that title down, "Race at Morning," did youthink of the appropriateness of that title on really various levels. That is,the fact that the "morning" is the boy. The "race" means human race as wellas the literal race in the hunt? You can interpret that title in various ways. Iwas just thinking about it as you were talking. No.About the value of the title. No, the title is in the little boy's terms, the morning of his life, andit happened in the morning, and I used the word "race"asto the exuberation the exuberanceofof speed. That, to him, wasthat life at that age neverdoes go slow. When it begins to slow up you get bored. It's always at top speed.No, I hadn't thought of it in reference to humanity. It justit washis title, his terms.Sir, do you find it best thatonce you get an idea, to sit right down and write it, or is it best to think it over and sort of let it? After you have been properly snake-bit with writing, you don't have anyspare time to sit down and think something over. You get one idea while you'rein the middle ofof getting another one down, and thenewnew idea has simply got togot to take its chance,unless it's, as they say, so hot at the moment that you will put down whatyou're doing to take it up. But probably some sort of ayou might callit protective coloration, that that idea don't come into the mind as new untilsubconsciously it has been hovered over for a while.That it has begun to takeits final shape before it ever comes into the conscious mind as an idea towrite. That you don't know where you got it, you don't know how long you've hadit.That itit was anwas an egg, oror a henthat's been sitting over that single egg for thewhatever length oftime it takes to hatch the thing out, before it comes into the consciousmind. When you think of stories [gap in tape] like this did in away, before it's really worth being developed. That's all right if it has, but I think that the primary purpose of astory is, first, to be fun to the bloke writing it and, the second, to be fun tothe bloke reading it. That if it has a message, that's all right.The message don't do any harm.But you're doing something that you like to do.It's fun to do, and if it's done wellif it was true, it's done the best youcan in aa moving, dramatic form, it will please who readsit. The message is incidental. Ithat is, what I'm trying to say is, Idon't think that any good story ever came because someone wastrying to tell somebody a message with it. If he's got a message that worrieshim, the best thing is to tell that message in the simplest sort of way insteadof trying to invent a story to fit it, because if the characters are true tothemselves sometimes they might not believe in that message. They may takecharge of the story, so the message is, you might say,a byproduct of something that hadhad no concern with the message.I was just wondering, if you have thishave a story, then yourpurpose is more producing something that's enjoyable to be read, but if it has atheme in it, in order to focus on the theme, in order to make the themeasas fully developed, I should think you'd have to keep that in mind,keep what the If I understand you right, in that case the message would be one of thecraftsman's tools. Thatwell, that'sthat's perfectly valid. A messageis one of his tools, just like the rhetoric, just like the punctuation. That'squite valid, but you don't write a story just to show your versatility with yourtools. You write a story to tell about people, man in his constant struggle withhis own heart, with the hearts of others, or with his environment.It'sit's man inin the ageless, eternal struggles which weinherit and we go through as though they've never happened before, shown for amoment in a dramatic instant ofof the furious motion of being alive.That's all any story is. You can catch this fluidity which is humanlife, and you focus a light on it, and you stop it long enough for people to beable to see it.Someone once remarkedI don't know where I read ithesaid none of your characters ever made any conscious choice betweengood and evil. Does that seem to you a true statement[or not]? I don'tdon't remember my characters that well.I would have to read Faulkner again.Iso I can't dispute that nornor agree with it. I don't believe I wouldagree with it offhand, though, but I can't cite you aninstance. Sir, in order to be a good writer or a polished writer, do you considerthat writing must be a full-time job, or do you feel like you can have some ofother business interest on the [outside] and also devote yourspare time to writing, say? Probably you're better off if you have other interests and maybe othercompulsions. I think that the writer, even thoughhehe don'tcan't spend all his time writing, he is neverfree of that demon which he invited or which took possession of him, to live withhim for the rest of his life, that he's always writing. He may notcarrycarry a notebook with him, but he's listening to terms ofspeech. He's struck by what people do, to wonder why he did that, why he didn'tdo the other. In that sense, he never stops being a writer, but he can't spendall his time at it because he mightwell, probably would, if he spenttoo much time at it he'd begin to write nonsense, balderdash. It's always goodnever to write yourself out at any time. It's fine to need to stop, and alwaysstop, as the book says, while you're looking good. Never write yourself to theend of a chapter or the endend of [a] thought.Always stop just before you get there, to have something to start on next time. Andif you have something else to do, going to school, a whole new job, or raising afamily or babysitting, then you are anxious and eager enough to get back to thewriting to where you will come at with a new head of steam.Sir, when you find that if you were going to, say, put a message or atheme in a certain story, that you would probably sit down and alter, say,perhaps the realistic events of what you've seen in order to makeit tell this message or the theme of which would alter the story, say the hunter story there, merely to put acrossa certain point. You can't do that. Once the characters are realized, theytheytake charge, and they're going to do only what they're going to do. You can't doanything about it.In other words, first comes the story and then . That's right. That's right. That is, most ofof a man's privatebeliefs will appear sooner or later in his behavior, his actions. The message, Ithink, comes from the story, not from the author's private beliefs, but fromthe characters in his story, that the author is not telling you amessage, but the characters in the story have told you something that they believe isnecessary that you know. Because no author can be responsible for the ideas ofhis characters. Do you think that one of the functions of writing is to, not teach, butto make the writer himself enjoy the life that he leads aside from his writingmore fully? May I have that again please, sir?Do you think that writing makeshelps the writer ornotdoesn't help him but that the [gap in tape] they canlearn more themselves and know more and enjoy life more fully? They do learn more as they write, but I doubt if they write just toteach themselves. They write because it's fun, because somewell, funis a bad term too, but something hashas struck them as being so trueand so important and so moving that they've got to do something with it, and, ofcourse, he does learn. He learns all the time he's writing just as the carpenterlearns all the time he's building houses or stables, but the writer writesbecause he ishe is on fire with something, an idea or a characterthat seems to him so true, so moving, that it won't let him rest. He's got toput it down. That's what I mean by fun. It'sfun is the wrong word.It'spassion is a better word.  I was wondering if your impression of the University haschanged since the impressions you had before you came here? Sir, I don't knowhow many of your characters but one at least in Requiem for aNun went here, and so you must have had some impression of the Universityitself, and I wonder if it's changed since you've actually been here? Not really. A school with awith a tradition ofbehavior, certain standards whichwhich the undergraduates follow,whether from choice or whether they are compelled to by the general atmosphereof the school, changes only asas life itself changes. Ifyouif you mean by change, if there're more automobiles parked aroundthe Lawn and the Grounds than there were thirty years ago, yes, the place haschanged. But they are ephemeral changes. They're not toosignificant and don't have too much to do withwiththewhat's basic in this school as a school, and I doubt that thereever will be great changes. The great changing would have to come from someloosening of theof the strictures which control it, the tenets,notnot so much the bylaws, but the unspokenthe moraltenets that this university functions within, accepts not because it'scompelled, but because they like it or it may havethey may have foundthat that's the most practical. Sir, you said, I believe, last year that The Sound andthe Fury was your best effort as a story. I was wondering if you have tried to usethat narrative method again [in other works]? I would if the story I'm working at requires it. I think the storycompels its own style to a great extent, that the writer don't need to bothertoo much about style. If he's bothering about style, then he'she'sgoing to write precious emptiness, not necessarily nonsense, butthere'llit'll be quite beautiful and quite pleasing to the ear, butthere won't be much content in it.That the story, the characters,theythey have their own laws which the writer simply must follow. That they will elect what they're going to do and what they won't do. The storyitself elects its own style. The writer's job is merely to pick andchoose between two more or less identical anecdotes. You won't need but one ofthem, and he will chose the one that seems to him the most tragic or thefunniest, but the characters themselves are saying "This is what Iwill do or what I won't do." If the writer is going to force and compel them he'sdestroyed them, that what he will wind up with is somethingthat hehe himself willwill never besatisfied with, will get no pleasure from, and as I've said before,the end in writing is not for success and not really for glory.It's because it's fun. Of course, any man likes to think ofof glory, but he wouldwrite if he knew that he would never be able to put his name on it.  Who was first? Yes, sir, I believe you are.I think that the hour is up. I don't think the bells are workingthis morning. Thank you very much indeed, Mr. Faulkner. I appreciate your beinghere ever so much.  We're both given to stage fright.I hope we're both well enough known here by now to where we don't need too muchintroduction. Am I talking right, you think? This would be addressedto young writers. It's a suggestion more than an idea. Two years ago President Eisenhower conceived a plan basedon an idea which is basically a sound one. This was that world conditions,the universal dilemma of mankind at this moment, are what they are simplybecause individual men and women of different races and tongues andconditions cannot discuss with one another these problems and dilemmas,which are primarily theirs, but must attempt to do so only through theformal organizations of their antagonistic and seemingly irreconcilablegovernments. That is, that individual people in all walks of life should begiven opportunity to speak to their individual opposite numbers all over theearthlaborer to laborer, scientist to scientist, doctors andlawyers and merchants and bankers and artists to their opposite numberseverywhere. There was nothing wrong with this idea. Certainly noartistpainter, musician, sculptor, architect, orwriterwould dispute it because this, trying to communicate manto man regardless of race or color or condition, is exactly what everyartist has already spent all his life trying to do, and as long as hebreathes, will continue to do. What doomed it, in my opinion, was symptomized by thephraseology of the President's own conceptlaborer to laborer,artist to artist, banker to banker, tycoon to tycoon. What doomed it, in myopinion, was an evil inherent in our culture itself. An evil qualityinherent in and perhaps necessary, though I dothough I, for one,do not believe this last, in the culture of any country capable of enduringand surviving through this period of history. This is the mystical belief,almost a religion, that individual man cannot speak to individual manbecause individual man can no longer exist. A belief that there is no placeanymore where individual man can speak quietly to individual man of suchsimple things as honesty to oneself and responsibility toward others andprotection for the weak and compassion and pity for all, because suchindividual things as honesty and pity and responsibility and compassion nolonger exist, and man himself can hope to continue only by relinquishing anddenying his individuality into a regimented group of his arbitrary,factional kind, arrayed against an opposite opposed arbitrary, factional,regimented group, both filling the same air at the same time with the samedouble-barreled abstractions of "peoples' democracy" and "minority rights"and "equal justice" and "social welfare"all the synonyms whichtake all the shame out of irresponsibility by not merely inviting but evencompelling everyone to participate in it. So, in this caseI mean the President'sPeople-to-People Committeethe artist, too, who has already spenthis life trying to communicate simply people-to-people the problems andpassions of the human heart and how to survive them or, anyway, endure them,has in effect been asked by the president of his country to affirm thatmythology which haswhich he has already devoted his life todenying: the mythology that one single individual man is nothing, andcancan have weight and substance only when organized into theanonymity of a group where he will have surrendered his individual soul fora number. It would be sad enough if only at such moments as thisImean, formal recognition by his country of the validity of his life'sdedicationdid the artist have to run full-tilt into what might becalled almost a universal will to regimentation, a universal will toobliterate the humanity from evenfrom man even to the extent ofrelieving him not only of moral responsibility, but even of physical painand mortality, by effacing his individuality into anyit does not matterwhich as long as he has vanished into one of themnationally-recognizedeconomic group by profession or trade or occupation or income-tax bracketor, if nothing else offers, finance-company list. His tragedy is that todayhe must even combat this pressure, waste some part of his puny but, if he isan artist, precious individual strength against this universal will toefface his individual humanity, in order to be an artist. Which comes atlast to the idea I want to suggest, which is what seems to me to be the onedilemma in which all young writers today participate. I think that perhaps all writers, while they are hot,working at top speed to try to get said all they feel the terrific urgencyto say, don't read the writers younger, after themselves. Perhaps for thesame reason which the sprinter or the distance-runner hashe doesnot have time to be interested in who is behind him or even up with him, butonly in who is in front. That was true in my own case, anyway, so there wasa gap of about twenty-five years during which I had almost no acquaintancewhatever with contemporary literature. So, when a short time ago I did begin to read thewriting being done now, I brought to it not only ignorance but a kind ofinnocence, freshness, what you might call a point of view and aninterest virgin of preconceptions. Anyway, I gotfrom the first story an impression which has repeated itself so consistentlysince that I shall offer it as a generalization. This is, that the youngwriter of today is compelled by the present state of our culture, which Itried to describe, to function in a kind of vacuum of the human race. Hischaracters do not function, live, breathe, struggle, in that moil and seetheof simple humanity as did those of our predecessors who were the mastersfrom whom we learned our craftDickens, Fielding, Thackeray,Conrad, Twain, Smollett, Hawthorne, Melville, James. Their names are legionwhose created characters were not just weaned but even spawned into a moiland seethe of simple human beings whose very existence was an affirmation ofan incurable and indomitable optimismmen and women likeourthemselves, understandable and comprehensible even whenantipathetical, even in the very moment while they were murdering or robbingor betraying you, since theirs too were the same simple human lusts andhopes and fears uncomplicated by regimentation or group compulsion. A moiland seethe of humanity into which they could venture, not only unappalledand welcome, but with pleasure too, since with no threat ofharmand with no threat of harm since the worst that could happento them would be a head butt by what was only another human head. An elbowor a knee skinned, but that too was only another human knee or elbow whichdid the skinning. A moil and seethe of mankind which accepted and believedin and functioned according, not to angles, but to moral principles. Wheretruth was not where you were standing when you looked at it, but was anunalterable quality or thing which could and would knock your brains out ifyou did not accept it or at least respect it. While today the young writer'scharacters must function not in individuality but in isolation, not topursue in myriad company the anguishes and hopes of all human hearts in aworld of a few simple, comprehensible truths and moral principles, but toexist alone inside a vacuum of facts which he did not choose and cannot copewith and cannot escape from like a fly inside an inverted tumbler. Let me repeat. I have not read all the work of thispresent generation of writing. I have not had time yet. So I must speak onlyof the ones I do know. I am thinking now of what I rate the best one,Salinger's Catcher in the Rye, perhaps because thisone expresses so completely what I have tried to say. A youth, father towhat willmustsomeday be a man, more intelligent than some and moresensitive than most, whohe would not even have called it byinstinct because he did not know he possessed it because God perhaps had putit there, loved man and wished to be a part of mankind, humanity, who triedto join the human race and failed. To me, his tragedy was not that he was,as he perhaps thought, not tough enough or brave enough or deserving enoughto be accepted into humanity. His tragedy was that when he attempted toenter the human race, there was no human race there. There was nothing forhim to do save buzz, frantic and inviolate, inside the glass wall of histumbler, until he either gave up or was himself, by himself, by his ownfrantic buzzing, destroyed. One thinks of course immediately of Huck Finn, anotheryouth already father to what will some day soon now be a man. But in Huck'scase all he had to combat was his small size, which time would cure for him.In time he would be as big as any man he had to cope with. And even as itwas, all the adult world could do to harm him was to skin his nose a little.Humanity, the human race, would and was accepting him already. All he neededto do was just to grow up into it. That is the young writer's dilemma as I seeit. Not just his, but all our problems is to save mankind from beingde-souled as the stallion or boar or bull is gelded, to save the individualfrom anonymity before it is too late, and humanity has vanished from theanimal called man. And who better to save man's humanity than the writer,the poet, the artist, since who should fear the loss of it more, since thehumanity of man is the artist's life's blood? Mr. Faulkner has consentedto answer any questions you might have about this paper or about his works. So[who shall lead] the questions? In As I Lay Dying, in the soliloquy of AddieBundren, she says that when she first met Anse that he had a good farm, and thathe was on that farm, and that he farmed it himself, and one gets the impression thathe was doing a pretty good job of it, and yet when we see him in the book, he'sa ne'er do well. Hehe depends on his neighbors. I waswondering if there werewas any implication that Addie might havesapped his will to work or his will to be apersonality? No, I wouldn't say so. I suspect that Anse didn't like to farm anyway,and he was just waiting until he could find a wife and get some children to dothe work for him. And soon as he got some children to do the work, he quit.That's the sort of Anse Bundrens that I'm familiar with in my country, and Iimagine he exists in Virginia, too.  May I ask you what moved you to write that essay? I find it very profound. I reckon that anything you have devoted agreat deal of your time to, any sort of craft, whether it's an important one ornot, becomes pretty serious to you, and maybe when you get along you think,"Well, I haveif it's not valid, I have wasted a lot of pretty valuabletime," and so I prefer to believe that it is valid, and it should continue, andthe people to carry it on are the people that come after me, and ifmy thoughts about it areare worth anything, whether they are or not,it had better be expressed so the young people after me can take a look at themand say, "It's nonsense," or not. I suppose that's the reason. Thatnoparticular need to improve writing or to better man's conditionmaybe, any more than any artist has. I think maybe it's not so much to betterman's condition but maybe to uplift his heart, to give him pleasure, fun.Anyway, it becomes important to the one who's spent all his life laying thebrick, and he wants the trade of bricklaying to continue. He does not need to be victim of it if he does not want to. He inheritedthis condition, and possibly he himself knows there'ssomething somewhere iswrong, but he doesn't know what. It may be someone who is old enough to haveseen the other side of this [nettle] may be able to tell him,"This is where the trouble is." No, sir, I don't think that he'sthe victim of it. He simply inherited a condition which is not too good,butbut I doubt if anything can stop the artist from being an artist,and I doubt if any condition, economic or social or any other, is going toprevent the good work being done, that even without anybody to say, "This iswhat my hindsight tells me is wrong," willwill aidhimwell, it will shorten the time maybe. He doesn't need to be toldwhat's wrong. He willwill solve that problem himself if he's going tokeep working, and the good one will keep working.  Isac McCaslin in "The Bear" relinquishes his heredity. Doyou think he may be in the same predicament as modern man, under the sameconditions that he can't find a humanity that he can fit in with? Well, there are some people in any time and age thatcannot face and cope with the problems. There seems to be three stages. Thefirst says, "This is rotten. I'll have no part of it. I willwill takedeath first." The second says, "This is rotten. I don't like it. I can't doanything about it, but at least I will not participate in it myself. I will gooff into a cave oror climb a pillar to sit on." The third says, "Thisstinks, and I'm going to do something about it." McCaslin is the second. Hesays, "This is bad, and I will withdraw from it." What we need are people whowill say, "This is bad, and I'm going to do something about it. I'm going tochange it."There is a great problem of the status in theof the writer andthe poet in our society. I think you have done a great deal to try to fix it. Itoccurs to me that after some thirty-three years ofI'mfifty-twoI started writing poetry when I was abouteighteen when I was trying to find my way and really always [felt a sortof] shame in being a poet. Until the other day, a manofwhom I consider a man of great dignity took me [to hispupils who] study poetry, because I was a poet. Now, I must say he wasa Russian who had said [at] one time that Russia, the revolutionkilled its soul, and he said this was a greattragedy for the country. Now, I think always in extremes of the poet and thewriter,[society,] and I would suspect that in America we[are more] conservative in pushing [against that] enormous conservatism that is in opposition to thecomplete radicalism of the Russian[the opportunities I'vehad] over the past few days . This country which is so reallytalented was a radical country, a visionary country, hasnow become crystalized and not writing, so that the poet, I see, frommy knowledge as a poet, the poets in San Francisco, youmay laugh at it, theirtheir manifesto is called "Howl."On the other hand, we have our academicso-called academic poets whoare very tame [because] they don't howl. They don't know how toshriek, and there's no guts in the middle. There are a few people,very few people, who make the synthesis of the romantic andclassic, the liberal and conservative . Yes, I agree with that to an extent. I think that there're timeswhenwhen the voice has more welcome to shout, to howl, than others,but I think that the voice is still shouting and howling even if it's inaudible.I'm convinced that it would take a great deal more than anypolice state to suppress and destroy the heirs to Dostoevsky and Tolstoy. Mybelief is that they are still writing in Russia. They have to hide it in thechimney or under the floor, but they are still producing the books.Yes, well very fortunatelydue to the death of Stalin now, the writers have beenfreed, and there is a great flourishing, and people were writing, people like have been writing, others,has been writing novels, andI can't evaluate them, but my friend who knows the Russianliterature says they are distinguished works.But there is another fact that in post-revolution Russia[the artist has]but the criticsI think the critics arelackinghave never honored their poets, theirvisionariesare always Well, maybe so. I'mI'm not too convinced that that has hurtthe writing, though, has hurt the poet.No, I suppose [the poetry] . It would beit would be pleasanter if he did get recognition and were an[integer]or a definite integer inthe culture of the country, butbut whether he is ornot, he's going to continue to be a poet and to dedicate his lifeand his breath to being a poet simply because that's what he likes. That's hiscup of tea.Yes, but it's difficultthe artist needssomehow . Well, yes. You surely don't mean that this modern dilemma which you've described sowell is concerned specifically, for instance, with the poets and artists. Do youthink [humans]do you think it applies just to thecreative group of people, or do you think it applies more widely? I thinkI would say that, of course, it applies toeverybody, butbut the creative man will suffer from it. The young manthat knows "there's something wrong with what I doIdon't know what it is, but I do know there's something wrong." That's because hehas not the perspective of an older person's hindsight to measureagainst. Iyes, I think anyone would be hurt. Aa doctorwould be a better doctor for being more of a humanitarian, a better lawyer. Iwas thinking more of people who deal with the human spirit. That is, theteacher, not the doer, but the teacher, which are men inin thecolleges, the priests, the artists,whosewhose craft, whose vocation is showing man thesplendor of his long history, that a frail web ofof fleshand bone, mostly water, stuck together in a ramshackle world held together byelectricity which may collapse at any moment, yet somehow he still believes init and still gets fired up enough to produce poetic records of man's strugglewhich are still pleasing and still uplift the human hearts five hundred yearsafter they were written, done.Mr. Faulkner? [I wonder] what you would saythis current cycle ofdecay ? Well, I don't quite like the word decay. Ias I see it, it wasbecause ofof overpopulation maybe and the mistakesofthat we had made which brought on the wars have compelled peopleto coalesce in order to get along, to live, that morechildren are being born every year with no provisions to take care of the onesthat we already have, that the man who insists on being an eccentric and anindividual is in everybody else's way. He's got to belong to something simply tokeep the wheels running smooth, which is fine for people to get along, but thatis bad for the artist, for the man to paint in and compose the music and writethe poetry.What year [was it] aroundwhat year would yousay this [period] began? Oh, around 1912, '13, '14, maybe.In other words, before the First World War? Yes, the seeds of it were implicit in the turn of the century, thoughmaybe it beganwell, '28, '29, and the collapse of Wall Street. Thatmay have been the first milepost of it.Though it's hard to say just where itdid begin. I would say that'swas a sharp mark to measure from.Say'29 maybe.Mr. Faulkner? After the writer or poet has gotten the howl out of his system,whatin what way do you think that he can influence his society tobecome more individualistic? Well, if he's going to put in the time on influencing his society, heain't going to have much time left to be a good poet.I think that he had better go ahead andand be a goodpoet and let his influence on society take care of itself, but I thinkhethat he is still got to write his poetry about thesimple fundamental verities ofof the human heart in conflict withitself, not in conflict with labor unions, nor with high prices, nor with, "Howam I going to get a Cadillac when all I've got now is a Mercury." He's got tostick to the simple, fundamental things, which are the anguishes and troubles ofhis own aspirations and his failed capability and capacity toaccomplish what he can [dream]. That's what thethe music, the poetry is about. It'sit's not about economics norbelonging to groups nor liberal movements nor improving mankind because theartist really don't really give a damn about mankind. He's too busy. He's busy being anartist, writing poetry or composing music, taking pictures. Yes, sir? I think the poet would still be a poet. He'd prefer to be a poet than tohave the Cadillac. There may be a culture which would compel him to have thatCadillac, but he would be a poor Cadillac owner just like he'd be a poor doctoror lawyer because he's going to be a poet first.  [Could you] compare Wall Street Panic Snopes and HoldenCaulfield, please? What advantages or qualities are there in Wall Street Panicthat Holden Caulfield has not now and never did have? Wall Street Panic knew where he wanted to go. He knew that he could getthere provided he observed a few of the rules of the game, which he did, and hegot there. I think that Wall Street Panic wasn't really a Snopes, that probably,actually, he was not a Snopes, that his father'smama may have done a little extra-curricular night work,and that he really wasn't a Snopes. He wasamore of a simple human being than the other Snopes were.But hehe wanted to be independent, wanted to make money, but he hadrules about how he was going to do it. He wanted to make money by simpleindustry, the old rules ofof working hard and saving your pennies, not by takingadvantage of anybody.Could you contrast him please withto Holden Caulfield in Catcher in the Rye? Well, I think that they were completely different. There's almost nogrounds that they would meet on. That Caulfield was asensitive young man that wanted to love man and couldn't find him. Wall StreetPanic Snopes was going to get along with man, but he didn't especially love mannornor did he have anything against man. He simply wantedto make a little money. He wanted success inin his ownterms ofof hard work, industry, which Caulfield didn't. Caulfieldwanted to love man, to be accepted by mankind, and he couldn't because in hissensitive terms, mankind wasn't there when he tried to touch it. you said earlierthat Holden Caulfield's tragedy was the fact that mankind wasn't there or thatHolden Caulfield didn't think he was there? He wasn't there.I sometimes thought the tragedy of Holden Caulfield was that he did notfall, in a way, that if he fell off into humanity he might've found humanity. Well, he would have to have been tougher than he was. If he had beentougher than that, there wouldn't have been any story in the first place, buthis story was anan intelligent, very sensitive youngman who was in thisthis day and time was an anachronism, was almostan obsolescence, trying to cope with and struggle withwith thepresent-day world, which he was not fitted for. Whenhe didn't wantmoney. He didn't want position, anything. He just wanted to find man and wantedsomething to love, and he couldn't. There was nothing there. The nearest he cameto it was his sister who was a child, andand though she tried to lovehim, she couldn't understand his problem. The only other human beings he raninto, he had preconceptions to doubt, the teacher which could'vehelped him, and he suddenly began to suspect the teacher's motives.Sir, this sounds an awful lot likea novel called The Sound and the Fury,[with] Quentin Compson wanting to love people and the same sortof relationship with his sister. I don't quite agree with you. I don't believe thatQuentin and Holden were very much alike inexcept in being a little too sensitiveand coming from a somewhat similar background ofof people thatwerewere over-intelligent but incapable ofof any strengthofof mutual affection and tenderness, which, as I got it,was Holden's home. Yes, sir, there was that difference.  Yes, that's right. That couldn't have been lived up to in any timemaybe. But Holden Caulfield was simply looking for something which should beeverybody's right, not only a privilege, but everybody's right, to find mankindandand love mankind and be accepted into mankind, and he couldn't,because mankind, as I tried to say in my paper Welcome. There's nothing to be said here tonight except thatMr. William Faulkner will read a selection from the "Spotted Horses."[Sir.] I can see now this is going to become a very bad habit with me, tostand up like this with a lot of nice people that don't dare say, "Shut upand sit down." This is about the horses. When the Texan, picking his teeth with a splinteredkitchen match, emerged from the house twenty minutes later, the tetheredwagons and riding horses and mules extended from the lot gate toVarner's store, and there were more than fifty men now standing alongthe fence beside the gate, watching him quietly, a little covertly, ashe approached, rolling a little, slightly bowlegged, the high heels ofhis carved boots printing neatly into the dust. "Morning, gents," hesaid. "Here, bud," he said to the little boy, who stood slightly behindhim, looking at the protruding butt of the pistol. He took a coin fromhis pocket and gave it to the boy. "Run to the store and get me a box ofgingersnaps." He looked about at the quiet faces, protuberant, suckinghis teeth. He rolled the match from one side of his mouth to the otherwithout touching it. "You boys done made your picks, have you? Ready tostart her off, hah?" They didn't answer. They were not looking at himnow. That is, he began to have the feeling that each face had stoppedlooking at him the second before his gaze reached it. After a momentFreeman said:"Aint you going to [gap in tape] [wait for Flem]?"   "Why?" the Texan said. Then Freeman stopped lookingat him too. There was nothing in Freeman's face either. There wasnothing, no alteration, in the Texan's voice. "Eck, you done alreadypicked out yours. So we can start her off when you are ready." "I reckonnot," Eck said. "I wouldn't buy nothing I was afraid to walk up to andtouch." "Them little ponies?" the Texan said. "You helped water and feedthem. I bet that boy of yours could walk up to any one of them." "Hebetter not let me catch him at it," Eck said. The Texan looked at thequiet faces, his gaze at once abstract and alert, with an impenetrablesurface quality like flint, as though the surface were impervious orperhaps there was nothing behind it.  "Them ponies is gentle as a dove, boys. The man thatbuys them will get the best piece of horseflesh he ever forked or druvfor the money. Naturally they got spirit; I aint selling crowbait.Besides, who'd want Texas crowbait anyway, with Mississippi full of it?" His stare was still absent andunwinking; there was no mirth or humor in his voice and there wasneither mirth nor humor in the single guffaw which came from the rear ofthe group. Two wagons were now drawing out of the road at the same time,up to the fence. The men got down from them and tied them to the fenceand approached. "Come up, boys," the Texan said. "You're just in time tobuy a good gentle horse cheap."  "How about that one that cut your vest off night before last?" a voice said. This time three or four guffawed. The Texan lookedtoward the sound, bleak and unwinking."What about it?" he said. Thelaughter, if it had been laughter, ceased. The Texan turned to thenearest gatepost and climbed to the top of it, his alternate thighsdeliberate and bulging in his tight trousers, the butt of the pistolcatching and losing the sun in pearly gleams. Sitting on the post, helooked down at the faces along the fence which were attentive, grave,reserved and not looking at him. "All right," he said. "Who's going tostart her off with a bid? Step right up; take your pick and make yourbid, and when the last one is sold, walk in that lot and put your ropeon the best piece of horseflesh you ever forked or druv for the money.There aint a pony there that aint worth fifteen dollars. Young, sound,good for saddle or work stock, guaranteed to outlast four ordinaryhorses; you couldn't kill one of them with a axle-tree" There was asmall violent commotion at the rear of the group. The little boyappeared, burrowing among the motionless overalls. He approached thepost, the new and unbroken paper carton lifted. The Texan leaned downand took it and tore the end from it and shook three or four of thecakes onto the boy's hands, a hand as small and almost as black as thatof a coon. He held the carton in his hand while he talked, pointing outthe horses with it as he indicated them. "Look at that one with thethree stocking-feet and the frost-bit ear; watch him now when they passagain. Look at that shoulder-action; that horse is worth twenty dollarsof any man's money. Who'll make me a bid on him to start her off?" Hisvoice was harsh, ready, forensic. Along the fence below him the menstood, with button close tp their overalls, the tobacco-sacks and wornpurses, the sparse silver and frayed bills hoarded a coin at a time inthe cracks of chimneys or chinked into the logs of walls. From time totime the horses broke and rushed with purposeless violence and huddledagain, watching the faces along the fence with wild mismatched eyes. Thelane was full of wagons now. As the others arrived they would have tostop in the road beyond it and the occupants came up the lane on foot.Mrs Littlejohn came out of her kitchen. She crossed the yard, lookingtoward the lot gate. There was a blackened wash pot set on four bricksin the corner of the yard. She built a fire beneath the pot and came tothe fence and stood there for a time, her hands on her hips and thesmoke from the fire drifting blue and slow behind her. Then she turnedand went back into the house. "Come on, boys," the Texan said. "Who'llmake me a bid?"   "Four bits," a voice said. The Texan didn't evenglance toward it."Or, if he dont suit you, how about that fiddle-headhorse without no mane to speak of? For a saddle pony, I'd rather havehim than this stocking-foot. I heard somebody say fifty cents just now.I reckon he meant five dollars, didn't he? Do I hear five dollars?""Four bits for the lot," the same voice said.This time there were no guffaws. It wasthe Texan who laughed, harshly, with only his lower face, as if he werereciting a multiplication table. "Fifty cents for the dried mud offenthem horses, he means," he said. "Who'll give a dollar more for the genuineTexas cockle-burrs?" Mrs Littlejohn came out of the kitchen, carryingthe sawn halfhalf of a wooden hogshead which she set on a stump beside thesmoking pot, and stood with her hands on her hips, looking into the lotfor a while without coming to the fence this time. Then she went backinto the house. "What's the matter with you boys?" the Texan said."Here, Eck, you have been helping me and you know them horses. How aboutmaking me a bid on that wall-eyed one you picked out last night? Here.Wait a minute." He thrust the paper carton into his other hip pocket andswung his feet inward and dropped, cat-light, into the lot. The ponies,huddled, watched him. Then they broke before him and slid stiffly alongthe fence. He turned them and they whirled and rushed back across thelot; whereupon, as though he had been waiting his chance when theyshould have turned their backs on him, the Texan began to run too, sothat when they reached the opposite side of the lot and turned, slowingto huddle again, he was almost upon himupon them. The earth became thunderous;dust arose, out of which the animals began to burst like flushed quailand into which, with that apparent unflagging faith in his owninvulnerability, the Texan rushed. For an instant the watchers could seethem in the dustthe pony backed into the angle of the fence and thestable, the man facing it, reaching toward his hip. Then the beastrushed at him in a sort of fatal and hopeless desperation and he struckit between the eyes with the pistol-butt and felled it and leaped uponits prone head. The pony recovered almost at once and pawed itself toits knees and heaved at its prisoned head and fought itself up, draggingthe man with it; for an instant in the dust the watchers saw the manfree of the earth and in violent lateral motion like a rag attached tothe horse's head. Then the Texan's feet came back to earth and the dustblew aside and revealed them, motionless, the Texan's sharp heels bracedinto the ground, one hand gripping the pony's forelock and the other itsnostrils, the long evil muzzle wrung backward over its scarred shoulderwhile it breathed in labored and hollow groans.  Mrs Littlejohn was in the yard again. No one hadseen her emerge this time. She carried an armful of clothing and ametal-ridged washboard and she was standing motionless at the kitchensteps, looking into the lot. Then she moved across the yard, stilllooking into the lot, and dumped the garments into the tub, stilllooking into the lot. "Look him over, boys," the Texan panted, turninghis own suffused face and the protuberant glare of his eyes toward thefence. "Look him over quick. Them shoulders and" He had relaxed for aninstant apparently. The animal exploded again; again for an instant theTexan was free to the earth, though he was still talking: "and legs youwhoa I'll tear your face right look him over quick boys worth fifteendollars of let me get a holt of who'll make me a bid whoa you blare-eyedjack rabbit, whoa!"They were movingnowa kaleidoscope of inextricable and incredible violence on theperiphery of which the metal clasps of the Texan's suspenderssun-glinted in ceaseless orbit, with terrific slowness across the lot.Then the broad clay-colored hat soared deliberately outward; an instantlater the Texan followed it, though still on his feet, and the pony shotfree in mad, staglike bounds. The Texan picked up the hat and struck thedust from it against his leg, and returned to the fence and mounted thepost again. He was breathing heavily. Still the faces didn't look athim as he took the carton from his hip and shook a cake from it and putthe cake into his mouth, chewing, breathing harshly. Mrs Littlejohnturned away and began to bail water from the pot into the tub, thoughafter each bucketful she turned her head and looked into the lot again."Now, boys," the Texan said. "Who says that pony aint worth fifteendollars? You couldn't buy that much dynamite for just fifteen dollars. There aint a one of them cant do amile in three minutes; turn them into pasture and they will boardthemselves; work them like hell all day and every time you think aboutit, lay them over the head with a single-tree and after a couple of daysevery jack rabbit one of them will be as tameso tame you will have to put themout of the house at night like a cat."He shook another cake from thecarton and ate it. "Come on, Eck," he said. "Start her off. How aboutten dollars for that horse, Eck?"  "What need I got for a horse I wouldn'tI would need abear-trap to catch?" Eck said. "Didn't you just see me catch him?" "Iseen you," Eck said. "And I dont want nothing as big as a horse if I gotto wrastle with it every time it finds me on the same side of a fenceit's on."  "All right," the Texan said. He was still breathing harshly,but now there was nothing of fatigue or breathlessness in it. He shookanother cake into his palm and inserted it beneath the moustache. "Allright. I want to get this auction started. I aint come here to live, nomatter how good a country you folks claim you got. I'm going to give youthat horse." For a moment there was no sound, not even that of breathingexcept the Texan's. "You going to give it to me?" Eck said. "Yes.Provided you will start the bidding on the next one." Again there was nosound save the Texan's breathing, and then the clash of Mrs Littlejohn'spail against the rim of the pot.  "I just start the bidding," Eck said. "I dont haveto buy it lessen I aint over-topped." Another wagon had come up to thelane. It was battered and paintless. One wheel had been repaired bycrossed planks bound to the spokes with baling wire and the two underfedmules wore a battered harness patched with bits of cotton rope; thereins were ordinary cotton plow-lines, not new. It contained a woman ina shapeless gray garment and a faded sunbonnet, and a man in faded andpatched though clean overalls. There was not room for the wagon to drawout of the lane so the man left it standing where it was and got downand came forwarda thin man, not large, with something about his eyes,something strained and washed-out, at once vague and intense, who shovedinto the crowd at the rear, saying, "What? What's that? Did he give himthat horse?" "All right," the Texan said. "That wall-eyed horse with thescarred neck belongs to you. Now. That one that looks like he's had hishad hishead in a flour barrel. What do you say? Ten dollars?"  "Did he give him that horsedid he give him that horse?" the newcomer said."Adollar," Eck said. The Texan's mouth was still open for speech; for aninstant his face died so behind his hard eyes."A dollar?" he said. "Onedollar? Did I actually hear that?" "Durn it," Eck said. "Two dollarsthen. But I aint""Wait," the newcomer said. "You, up there on thepost." The Texan looked at him. When the others turned, they saw thatthe woman had left the wagon too, though they had not known she wasthere untilsince they had not seen the wagon drive up. She came among thembehind the man, gaunt in the gray shapeless garment and the sunbonnet,wearing stained canvas gymnasium shoes. She overtook the man but she didnot touch him, standing just behind him, her hands rolled before herinto the gray dress."Henry," she said in a flat voice. The man lookedover his shoulder. "Get back to that wagon," he said."Here, missus,"the Texan said. "Henry's going to get the bargain of his life in about aminute. Here, boys, let the missus come up close where she can see.Henry's going to pick out that saddle-horse the missus been wanting.Who says ten"  "Henry," the woman said. She didn't raise hervoice. She had not once looked at the Texan. She touched the man's arm.He turned and struck her hand down. "Get back to that wagon like I toldyou." The woman stood behind him, her hands rolled again into her dress.She was not looking at anything, speaking to anyone."He aint no moredespair than to buy one of them things," she said. "And us not but fivedollars away from the poorhouse, he aint no more despair." The manturned upon her with that curious air of leashed, of dreamlike fury. Theothers lounged along the fence in attitudes gravely inattentive, almostoblivious. Mrs Littlejohn had been washing for some time now, pumpingrhythmically up and down above the washboard in the sud-foamed tub. Now she stood erect again, her soap-raw hands on her hips, looking into thelot."Shut your mouth and get back to that wagon," the man said. "Do youwant me to take a wagon stake to you?" He turned and looked up at theTexan. "Did you give him that horse?" he said. The Texan was looking atthe woman. Then he looked at the man; still watching him, he tilted thepaper carton over his open palm. A single cake came out of it."Yes," hesaid.  "Is the fellow that bids in to this next horse going toget that first one too?" "No," the Texan said. "All right," the othersaid. "Are you going to give a horse to the man that makes the first bidon the next one?" "No," the Texan said. "Then if you was just startingthe auction by giving away a horse, why didn't you wait till we wereall here?" The Texan stopped looking at the other. He raised the emptycarton and squinted carefully into it, as if it might contain a preciousjewel or perhaps a deadly insect. Then he crumpled it and dropped itcarefully beside the post on which he sat."Eck bids two dollars," hesaid. "I believe he still thinks he's bidding on them scraps of bob-wirethey come here in instead of one of them horses. But I got to acceptit. But are you boys""So Eck's going to get two horses at a dollar ahead," the newcomer said. "Three dollars." The woman touched him again.He flung her hand off without turning and she stood again, her handsrolled into her dress across her flat stomach, not looking at anything."Mister," she said, "we got chaps in the house that never had shoeslast winter. We aint got corn to feed the stock. We got five dollars Iearned weaving by firelight after dark. And he aint no more despair.""Henry bids three dollars," the Texan said. "Raise him a dollar, Eck,and the horse is yours." Beyond the fence the horses rushed suddenly andfor no reason and as suddenly stopped, staring at the faces along thefence.  "Henry," the woman said. The man was watching Eck.His stained and broken teeth showed a little beneath his lip. His wristsdangled into fists below the faded sleeves of his shirt too short fromfrommany washings."Four dollars," Eck said."Five dollars!" the husbandsaid, raising one clenched hand. He shouldered himself forward towardthe gatepost. The woman didn't follow him. She now looked at the Texanfor the first time. Her eyes were a washed gray also, as though they hadfaded too like the dress and the sunbonnet."Mister," she said, "if youtake that five dollars I earned my chaps a-weaving for one of themthings, it'll be a curse on you and yours during all the time of man.""Five dollars!" the husband shouted. He thrust himself up to the post,his clenched hand on a level with the Texan's knees. He opened it upon awad of frayed banknotes and silver. "Five dollars! And the man thatraises it will have to beat my head off or I'll beat hisn.""All right,"the Texan said. "Five dollars is bid. But dont you shake your hand atme."  At five oclock that afternoon the Texan crumpled thethird paper carton and dropped it to the earth beneath him. In thecopper slant of the leveling sun which fell also upon the line of limpgarments in Mrs Littlejohn's back yard and which cast his shadow andthat of the post on which he sat long across the lot where now and thenthe ponies still rushed in purposeless and tireless surges, the Texanstraightened his leg and thrust his hand into his pocket and took out acoin and leaned down to the little boy. His voice was now hoarse, spent."Here, bud," he said. "Run to the store and get me a box ofgingersnaps." The men still stood along the fence, tireless, in theiroveralls and faded shirts. Flem Snopes was there now, appearedappeared suddenlyfrom nowhere, standing beside the fence with a space the width of threeor four men on either side of him, standing there in his small yetdefinite isolation, chewing tobacco, in the same gray trousers andminute bow tie in which he had departed last summer but in a new cap,gray too like the other, but new, and overlaid with a bright golfer'splaid, looking also at the horses in the lot. All of them twosave two hadbeen sold for sums ranging from three dollars and a half to eleven andtwelve dollars. The purchasers, as they had bid them in, had gathered asthough by instinct into a separate group on the other side of the gate,where they stood with their hands lying upon the top strand of thefence, watching with a still more sober intensity the animals which someof them had owned for seven or eight hours now but had not yet laidhands upon. The husband, Henry, stood beside the post on which the Texansat. The wife had gone back to the wagon, where she sat gray in the graygarment, motionless, looking at nothing still; she might have beensomething inanimate which he had loaded onto the wagon to move itsomewhere, waiting now in the wagon until he should be ready to go onagain, patient, insensate, timeless.  "I bought a horse and I paid cash for it," he said.His voice was harsh and spent too, the mad look in his eyes hadhad aquality glazed now and even sightless. "And yet you expect me to standaround here till they are all sold before I can get my horse. Well, youcan do all the expecting you want. I'm going to take my horse out ofthere and go home." The Texan looked down at him. The Texan's shirt wasblotched with sweat. His big face was cold and still, his voice level."Take your horse then." After a moment Henry looked away. He stood withhis head bent a little, swallowing from time to time."Aint you going tocatch him for me?""It aint my horse," the Texan said in that flat stillvoice. After a while Henry raised his head. He didn't look at theTexan.  "Who'll help me catch my horse?" he said. Nobodyanswered. They stood along the fence, looking quietly into the lot wherethe ponies huddled, already beginning to fade a little where the longshadow of the house lay upon them, deepening. From Mrs Littlejohn'skitchen the smell of frying ham came. A noisy cloud of sparrows sweptacross the lot and into a chinaberry tree beside the house, and in thehigh soft vague blue swallows stooped and swirled in erratic indecision,their cries like strings plucked at random. Without looking back, Henryraised his voice: "Bring that ere plowline." After a while the wifemoved. She got down from the wagon and took a coil of new cotton ropefrom it and approached. The husband took the rope from her and movedtoward the gate. The Texan began to descend from the post, stiffly, asHenry put his hand on the latch. "Come on here," he said.His wife hadstopped when he took the rope from her. She moved again, obediently, herhands rolled into the dress across her stomach, passing the Texanwithout looking at him."Dont you go in there, missus," he said. Shestopped, not looking at him, not looking at anything. The husband openedthe gate and entered the lot and turned, holding the gate open butwithout raising his eyes."Come on here," he said."Dont you go inthere, missus," the Texan said. The wife stood motionless between them,her face almost concealed by the sunbonnet, her hands folded across herstomach.  "I reckon I better," she said. The oldthe other men did notlook at her at all, at her or Henry either. They stood along the fence,grave and quiet and inattentive, almost bemused. Then the wife passedthrough the gate; the husband shut it behind them and turned and beganto move toward the huddled ponies, the wife following in the gray andshapeless garment within which she moved without inference oflocomotion, like something on a moving platform, a float. The horseswere watching them. They clotted and blended and shifted amongthemselves, on the point of breaking though not breaking yet. Thehusband shouted at them. He began to curse them, advancing, the wifefollowing. Then the huddle broke, the animals moving with high, stiffknees, circling the two people who turned and followed again as the herdflowed and huddled again at the opposite side of the lot.  "There he is," the husband said. "Get him into thatcorner." The herd divided; the horse which the husband had bought joltedon stiff legs. The wife shouted at it; it spun and poised, plunging,then the husband struck it across the face with the coiled rope and itwhirled and slammed into the corner of the fence. "Keep it there now,"the husband said. He shook out the rope, advancing. The horse watchedhim shouted wild, glaring eyes; it rushed again, straight toward thewife.She shouted at it and waved her arms but it soared past her in along bound and rushed again into the huddle of its fellows. Theyfollowed and hemmed it again into the other corner; again the wife failedto stop its rush for freedom and the husband turned and struck her withthe coiled rope. "Why didn't you head him?" he said. "Why didn't you?"He struck her again; she didn't move, not even to fend the rope with araised arm. The men along the fence stood quietly, their faces loweredas though brooding upon the earth at their feet. Only Flem Snopes wasstill watchingif he ever had been looking into the lot at all, standingin a little island of isolation, chewing with his characteristic faintsidewise thrust beneath the new plaid cap.  The Texan said something, not loud, harsh and short.He entered the lot and went to the husband and jerked the uplifted ropefrom his hand. The husband whirled as though he were about to spring atthe Texan, crouched slightly, his knees bent and his arms held slightlyaway from his sides, though his gaze never mounted higher than theTexan's carved and dusty boots. Then the Texan took the husband by thearm and led him back toward the gate, the wife following, and throughthe gate which he held open for the woman and then closed. He took a wadof banknotes from his trousers and removed a bill from it and put itinto the woman's hand. "Get him into the wagon and get him on home," hesaid.  "What's that for?" Flem Snopes said. He hadapproached. He now stood beside the post on which the Texan had beensitting. The Texan didn't look at him."Thinks he bought one of themponies," the Texan said. He spoke in a flat still voice, like that of aman after a sharp run. "Get him on away, missus.""Give him back thatmoney," the husband said, in his lifeless, spent tone. "I bought thathorse and I aim to have him if I got to shoot him before I can put arope on him." The Texan did not even look at him."Get him on away fromhere, missus," he said."You take your money and I take my horse," thehusband said. He was shaking slowly and steadily now, as though he werecold. His hands open and shut below the frayed cuffs of his shirt. "Giveit back to him," he said. "You dontyou dont own no horse of mine," the Texansaid. "Get him on home, missus." The husband raised his spent face, hismad glazed eyes. He reached out his hand. The woman held the banknote inher folded hands across her stomach. For a while the husband's shakinghand merely fumbled at it. Then he drew the banknote free. "It's myhorse," he said. "I bought it. These fellows saw me. I paid for it. It'smy horse. Here." He turned and extended the banknote toward Snopes. "Yougot something to do with these horses. I bought one. Here's the moneyfor it. I bought one. Ask him." Snopes took the banknote. [turning pages] They're in the lot again still trying to catch the horses. This is Eck andthe little boy. "Watch out, paw!" the boy said. "There he is! There'sourn!" It was the one the Texan had given Eck. "Catch him, Paw!" "Getout of my way," Eck said. "Get back to that wagon." The line was stilladvancing. The ponies milled, clotting, forced gradually backward toward theopen door of the barn. Henry was still slightly in front, crouched slightly,his thin figure, even in the mazy moonlight, emanating something of thatspent fury. The splotchy huddle of animals seemed to be moving before theadvancing line of men like a snowball which they might have been pushingbefore them by some invisible means, gradually nearer and nearer to thebackblack yawn of the barn door. Later it was obvious that the ponies were sointent upon the men that they did not realize that the barn was even behindthem until they backed into the shadow of it. Then an indescribable sound, amovement of desperate and despairing, arose among them; for an instant ofstatic horror men and animals faced one another, then the men whirled andran before a gaudy vomit of long wild faces and splotched chests whichovertook and scattered them and flung them sprawling aside and completelyobliterated from sight Henry and the little boy, neither of whom had movedthough Henry had flung up both arms, still holding his coiled rope, the herdsweeping on across the lot, to crash through the gate which the last manthrough it had neglected to close, leaving it slightly ajar, carrying all ofthe gate save the upright to which the hinges were nailed with them, and soamong the teams and wagons which choked the lane, the teams springing andlunging too, snapping hitch-reins and tongues. Then the whole inextricablemass crashed among the wagons and eddied and divided about the one in whichthe woman sat, and rushed on down the lane and into the road, dividing, onehalf going one way and one half the other. The men in the lot, except Henry, got to their feetand ran toward the gate. The little boy once more had not been touched,not even thrown off his feet; for a while his father held him clear ofthe ground in one hand, shaking him like a rag doll. "Didn't I tell youto stay in that wagon?" Eck cried. "Didn't I tell you?""Look out, paw!"the boy chattered out of the violent shaking. "There's ourn! There hegoes!" It was the horse the Texan had given them again. It was as ifthey owned no other, the other one did not exist; as if by some absoluteand instantaneous rapport of blood they had relegated to oblivion theone for which they had paid money. They ran to the gate and down thelane where the other men had disappeared. They saw the horse the Texanhad given them whirl and dash back and rush through the gate into MrsLittlejohn's yard and run up the front steps and crash once on thewooden veranda and vanish through the front door. Eck and the boy ran uponto the veranda. A lamp sat on a table just inside the door. In itsmellow light they saw the horse fill the long hallway like a pinwheel,gaudy, furious and thunderous. A little further down the hall there wasa varnished yellow melodeon. The horse crashed into it; it produced asingle note, almost a chord, in bass, resonant and grave, of deep andsober astonishment;the horse with itsmonstrous and antic shadow whirled again and vanished through anotherdoor. It was a bedroom; Ratliff, in his underclothes and one sock andwith the other sock in his hand and his back to the door, was leaningout the open window facing the lane, the lot. He looked back over hisshoulder. For an instant he and the horse glared at one another. Then hesprang through the window as the horse backed out of the room and intothe hall again and whirled and saw Eck and the little boy just enteringthe front door, Eck still carrying his rope. It whirled again and rushedon down the hall and onto the back porch just as Mrs Littlejohn,carrying an armful of clothes from the line and the washboard, mountedthe steps."Get out of here, you son of a bitch," she said.She struck with the washboard; it dividedneatly on the long mad face and the horse whirled and rushed back up thehall, where Eck and the boy now stood.  "Get to hell out of here, Wall!" Eck roared.He dropped to the floor, covering hishead with his arms. The boy didn't move, and for the third time thehorse soared over the unwinking eyes and the unbowed and untouched headand onto the front veranda again just as Ratliff, still carrying thesock, came around the corner of the house and up the steps.The horse whirled without breaking orpausing. He galloped to the end of the veranda and took the railing andsoared outward, hobgoblin and floating, in the moon. It landed in thelot still running and crossed the lot and galloped through the wreckedgate and among the overturned wagons and the still intact one in whichHenry's wife still sat, and on down the lane and into the road. A quarter of a mile further on, the road gashedpallid and moony between the moony shadows of the bordering trees, thehorse still galloping, galloping its shadow into the dust, the roaddescending now toward the creek and the bridge. It was of wood, justwide enough for a single vehicle. When the horse reached it, it wasoccupied by a wagon coming from the opposite direction and drawn by twomules already asleep in the harness and the soporific motion. On theseat was Tull and his wife, in splint chairs in the wagon behind themsat their four daughters, all returning belated from an all-day visitwith some of Mrs Tull's kin. The horse neither checked nor swerved. Itcrashed once on the wooden bridge and rushed between the two mules which waked lunging in oppositedirections in the traces, the horse now apparently scrambling along thewagon-tongue itself like a mad squirrel and scrambling at the end-gateof the wagon with its forefeet as if it intended to climb into the wagonwhile Tull shouted at it and struck at its face with his whip. The muleswere now trying to turn the wagon around in the middle of the bridge. Itslewed and tilted, the bridge-rail cracked with a sharp report above theshrieks of the women; the horse scrambled at last across the back of oneof the mules and Tull stood up in the wagon and kicked at its face. Then the front end of the wagonrose, flinging Tull, the reins now wrapped several times about hiswrist, backward into the wagon bed among the overturned chairs andthe exposed stockings and undergarments of his women. The pony scrambledfree and crashed again on the wooden planking, galloping again. Thewagon lurched again; the mules had finally turned it on the bridge wherethere was not room for it to turn and were now kicking themselves freeof the traces. When they came free, they snatched Tull bodily out of thewagon. He struck the bridge on his face and was dragged for several feetbefore the wrist-wrapped reins broke. Far up the road now, distancingthe frantic mules, the pony faded on. While the five women stillshrieked above Tull's unconscious body, Eck and the little boy came up,trotting, Eck still carrying his rope. He was panting. "Which way'd hego?" he said. [audience laughter] In the now empty and moon-drenched lot, his wife andMrs Littlejohn and Ratliff and Lump Snopes, the clerk, and three othermen raised Henry out of the trampled dust and carried him into MrsLittlejohn's back yard. His face was blanched and stony, his eyes wereclosed, the weight of his head tautened his throat across the protrudinglarynx; his teeth glinted dully beneath his lifted lip. They carried himon toward the house, through the dappled shade of the chinaberry trees.Across the dreaming and silver night a faint sound like remote thundercame and ceased. "There's one of them on the creek bridge," one of themen said."It's that one of Eck's," another said. "The one thatwas in the house." Mrs Littlejohn had preceded them into the hall. Whenthey entered with Henry, she had already taken the lamp from the tableand she now stood beside an open door, holding the lamp high."Bring him inhere," she said. She entered the room first and set the lamp on thedresser. They followed with clumsy scufflings and pantings and laidHenry on the bed and Mrs Littlejohn came to the bed and stood lookingdown at Henry's peaceful and bloodless face. "I'll declare," she said."You men." notonly a privilege, but everybody's right, to find mankind and love mankind and beaccepted into mankind, and he couldn't, because mankind, as I tried to say in mypaper, in Holden's terms, wasn't there anymore. Sir, mankind, as you say, wasn't there. Thatin this time, well,[it isn't.] The problem is[in things before these, would you say like]Hamlet or times past [these same] conditions[pointman] has always struggled to find mankind and often hecan't do it.[It's] sort of [universal]. Except it's only now in historythat man has been compelled into groups, that there was no way for him toexist unless he belonged to a group, that everybody has to belong to a group. Ifit's a not a union, not a trade union, not a guildof course, they existed fivehundred years agobut now everybodya teacher has got to belong to a group.It'sit's got to be a Phi Beta Kappa badge or got to be an income tax bracket orif nothing else, as I said, it's how many installments he still owes on hisicebox or his car, that nobody belongs to himself anymore. He belongs to afinance company or a group or an organization. If he don't, there's no place forhim.Would you [believe thatthis system]it seems to me that this is a certain class of people,and it may prevail because we have television. We have certain[standardizations]. But I still think there are as manyindividuals growing up now as there were in times before. I would like to think so. I'mafraid, though, that it takes so much of a man's time to be an individual nowthat he don't have very much left be a poet. how does a man whoworks in a chewing gum factory in Detroit communicate with a man who shepherdssheep in Algeria? Let's say that they're both simple, [pensive]men, [and you] put them together. This is the man-to-manconfrontation that you speak of. On what terms can they communicate? It's almost impossible becausethe only way two people can communicate is to meet one another inin quiet. Idon't think they can do it over any artificial means ofof communicationlike radio oror telephone. They've got to meet face-to-face because only a verysmall part of communication is from speech, and how a man in Detroit and anAlgerian shepherd cancan meet I don't know, but all they need to do tocommunicate is to meet in solitude and peace, I think. To sit on the same sandhill together for a while.But the pressure is against that, that people mustn'tdo that. They must function through committees with slogans and catch phrases, polysyllabic abstractions that really meannothing.Don't you think nowadays thatpossibly there are a great many individuals whomwhom you don't recognize asindividuals because they don'tdon't seem to be doing anything, and that's wherethey are individualsthey're not belonging? They're not necessarily worryingabout the next ? I hope so. I hope there are a lot of them. I don't know very many of them that arethat are free of the pressure tobelong to something. There may be some. I would like to know that there are agreat many of them.Well, I should think that probably inin the teaching world, in universitiesand colleges, there might be more than elsewhere. Would you disagree withthat? No, I would say that there wouldbe. That is the best, the happiest place, for the man to be an individual,is in college.[You're saying]the solution is talk to everybody? Yes.I'd like to suggest that this talk [has been] profoundly true, asI recall a [white paper] if you'll examine earlier propaganda you will find an appeal to the individual,the individual by the millions, [very much] to the individual as he sits in abazar in Baghdad oror in Calcutta, in his ownlanguageas for one individual to another, that is where I think that theyhave their [big success]. Yes, sir, butbut ain't most of that telling the individual something?It's not saying to the individual, "Talk to me." It's saying, "Listen to me."That's the trouble with all propaganda.No, sir, it is not, if I may contradict that. I think the African is verymuch invited to talk, and the proof of it that's hetalking today, in Ghana. Well, I certainly hope you'reright.And I would say that your[mass man] is a creation of western civilization. I don'tthink he exists in India. I must sayindividual of the individualwhich is probably so intense. There again, I was [very muchstruck]. I couldn't help wondering whether all this about thehowling and the hardship of the present generation couldn't be found very muchmore profoundly if you look at the lives [of the poets] and [the lives of Dickens], and the hardships . Aren'twe merely basing ourselves upon the Cadillac standard? [He doesn't haveany ideals]. Isn't that the point I'm trying to make, that our culture is foundedon the Cadillac ideal?Yes, [that's where I agreewith you]. to inform you how howljuxtaposed to the academics, I suppose . Now, my point is thatthese are extremes of the arts. One is the breaking away, which is not[true]howl, not speech, and I juxtapose this to theacademic poets.And I think we used the term ajust a shrill shriek. Now, this is notspeech. Speech is somewhere in the middle. Yes, that's right. I agree with that.You're not breaking it up, andyou're not holding it back, but you're [comfortable]. I thinkour culture is [accustomed][extremes]Perhaps it's waitingfor [the poet in the middle, before it starts] talking andtalking.background of[the San Francisco] poets. They seem to get together in agroup and play music and generally carouse while they create.And I was wondering how this would fit in with your ideas that the artist is anindividual. Can they be individuals when they're creating as a group? Oh, I'm sure he can. Hishis pursuits in his spare time wouldn't have todo with his attitude toward his own freedom, as freedom is no good to you ifyou can'tit's worth nothing if you can't relinquish it now and then, use it.The only way you can test that you've got it is to see how far it will go.Can I say one more thing? The poets in San Francisco areunlearned. They've not read the [greats]they've not read theirpredecessors in literature, and they resist any kind of[learning], and it seems to me all the great poets, all thegreat writers have read and know [their style], and these don't. And I would say that the academic poets are over-read and have novitality. These people have all the vitality, and no control, and the others areover-controlled. Where are the middle people[in the poems that I read andthe novels I read]?Sir, do you think economicallyhard times could aid creative energy? People can't go on buying pricey cars andliving , and it seems like a little more aggressive spirit. Intimes like this, if there were a real recession, it might not harmsome of the individualism [that seems to die if there is plenty ofeverything.] Do you agree at all? I don't know whether thatwouldwould produce anyany more and better poetry. More people might buy whatpoetry is for sale. Thatthat is, if they couldn't buy the Cadillacsand nobody likesto sit down and just think. He has to do something with himself, so maybe theymay even buy poetry at the last, but it wouldn't make people write any better poetry Ithink. No, sir. No, sir, I don't think so.  Well, I mean what I thought I said. I'm sorry. Maybe I don't understand your question. No, sir. I've never said that. Iwas simply pointing out to the young writer what I believe was his trouble.He knows there's something wrong, but maybe he hasn't seen this, that I wassimply trying to show him what a little more experience than hehas suggestedto me may be the trouble.That he himself without knowing it is constrictedtoo much by the regimentation necessary for a nation to sacrifice as much asnations have to to oppose two antipathetic ideologies, that I'm convinced thatthe poet can do his bit toward supporting the manufacture ofof A-bombs andthings like that if that is necessary and can still be a good poet. I'mconvinced, too, that if anyone is to bring us to some sense, it's not going tobe the people that make the A-bombs nor sell the Cadillacs. It'll be the poets,the artists. I still don't think he needs toworry about that. Ifif he is writing of the struggles of the human heart inconflict with itself or with others or with its environment, he'll be writing inthe recognizable terms which people have all met in their own privatedilemmas. Well, we would say thatevery man has what you have called his own private world, but if he does notwrite about that in recognizable terms, in terms which everybody else can applyto his and her own private world, then it's not going to be of much value.Thathe's got to write of his own private world in universal terms. That's what Imean by the eternal, simple, few verities which man's heart anguishes over.They are recognizable by anyone, who wouldn't recognize thethe culture andthe economy ofof 1950. He would have to translate that into his own terms, butthese verities that I speak of, thethe simple truth would be recognizedbyby anyone of any age, of any time, which I think is the reasonthatthe good music, good poetry, the good pictures don't have any date,because anyone recognizes them. They're still true, what they were talkingabout, no matter what costume they wore. isn't it possible,though, that these eternal verities may be spoken of in certain styles,addressed to contemporaries and yet misunderstood and therefore neglected?Aren't therearen't there writers who are addressed by their contemporaryaudiences who are totally neglected because of theof the manner in which they wereaddressed and not because of the subject matter? I don't know, sir. It's seemedthat [gap in tape] in recognizable termsthere'll always be somebody to read it. I mean by recognizable terms you can write a long treatise abouthonesty, and your audiencewill go to sleep in a few minutes, but if you writeabout honesty in some dramatic form in terms of recognizable people, then theaudience will stay awake to see what happened to them, whether they got awaywith bebeing dishonest or whether honesty paid. That's what I mean byrecognizable terms.That if you write in ain a language, an essay, people won'tlisten because it's not familiar, but if you write in terms of people inmotion, they will listen and they will learn. Thethe poet can talk to peoplethat way when they wouldn't listen to him at all if he wrote a speech or anessay.How do you feel about The Hamlet being made into a movie and did you work onthe script of that? No, I'm not a moving picture man and don't probablydon't really carefor pictures. Oh, I see one occasionally, but I suppose I don't take movingpictures very seriously. Maybe they come at the wrong time of dayto go to see. And they make too much noise, too.I'd rather sit down with a book and read it than to listen to something.that is the great medium it seemsfor the artist . ShakespeareShakespeare who speaks to allpeopleto the people who can't read. That's right. What's against it is it costs too much money. It'simpossible for one man to have the camera and the film and to make exactlywhat he thinks is right and true to make. You can do that with a dollar's worthof paper and a nickel pencil but you can't do with that film. It costs toomuch. did you say that thehighest form of endeavors is not to sit back and say, "Well, I won't be a partof this," but it's saying that "It's is sad, and I'm going to do something aboutit." Howhow do you reconcile this to what you say, the fact that the writershouldn't care whether he makes any effect on society? Oh, that's easy, because youcan'tthe one thing that man can do for eight hours a day is work, butyou can't work even longer than eight hours a day. You can be a reformer, butyou don't need to be a poet at the same time. You'll be a poet for eight hoursand be a reformer for eight hours and sleep for eight hours.It'sthere'sthere's no reason why they should ever conflict. If you try to be areformer and a poet at the same time, then you're going to be writing propaganda,which stops being poetry.I disagree with you. Some of thegreatest poetry in the English literature is didactic. It's teaching, preaching[poetry]. I mean, Wordsworth was one of them, I think. Ithink we underrate thethe didactic [element inpoetry]. Wouldn't you have liked his poetry if he were not preaching?Yes, but I think thatI think we need to come again to an appreciation ofhis didacticism. I think it's a time again almost for preachingpoetry. Well, that's Well, maybe a poet could bebe happier being a preacher and a poet, too,but I think that he's primarily either a poet or primarily either apreacher, and if he's got to try to be both at the same time, one is going tosuffer.Well, I don't know. I like your Fable very much and admire it as a great,great novel, but I think [it's a] a terrible sermon, [afrightening sermon]. I use the word terrible as you do. It wasn't intended to be asermon. That is, it was a matter of indifference to the writer whether it was asermon or not. He was simply writing about something that seemedseemed true andmoving to him.Sir, last spring you spoke of thework ofwhen you were asked, of William Styron and Shelby Foote and Warren Eysteras young writers whose novels elicited some approval from you. They seemedpromising writers. Do you think that the fact that they, as far as I know,writedo not write about cities gives them more of a possibility for showing thehuman heart in conflict with itself? I would say that in a city,theto belong, to conform that I spoke of is more apparent, not necessarily moreprevalent, but there'sthere'sthere's more space between you andand the wallof pressure in the country where there is not so much fewer people butbutfewer of the constant symptoms ofof belonging, of being grouped, of beingpressed. I don't think that their work is any better because theytheytheywrite about the country. I think that to me that work, too, reflects the samething, that the characters don't participate in that free, almost jolly,[ordinary] moil and seethe of simple people, that the characters ofof Dickens,every time they stepped outdoors, they were in it. They were right in the middle of the humanrace. Every simple act they performed they were in the middle of mankind,the human race, which the characters in the books today don't seem to be able toattain.You'd feel that Salinger, forexample, just hasn't created enough characters who seem to be a part of this bighuman race. There isn't just athere just isn't enough for Holden Caulfield tocome in contact with before he can get anywhere? He couldn't get to them. Hetried. There was the chance with the professor that understood him andand couldhave helped him, but there he hadright in there he had run into apreconception which was foisted on him, that every man ifif he's not happilymarried, he must be homosexual. That's the pressure to belong to a group, tobe typed, that you can't be yourself, you've got to belong to something. Ifheif he ran into two people that should have been a part of theof the moil andseethe ofof simple people which I spoke about, that was the prostitute and thepimp, and the only point they met on was that shabby five-dollar bill, thatthere was no human contact otherwise, even when the man hit him it mighthave been a door swinging into him. There's nothing human in it. The only humancontact he could reach was with his little sister, who was too young to seethat she knew that he was in trouble, but she had no conception ofof whatthe anguish and trouble was.Mr. Faulkner Before you spoke about, when you gave your list of the great masters you seemed to end with Twain and with James, and then later when youspoke about the subject of our cycle of decadence, you named the years 1912,'13, '14. Do you think it may be possible that there is a coincidence betweenthat time, and the beginning of the cycle, if indeed there is one, and the worksof such great European masters as Joyce, Proust, Mann, Gide, the people who seemto deal with fiction in an interiorizing way as opposed to the outdoor world ofsuch earlier masters that you mentioned like Fielding, Smollett? I would say that the peoplewho had matured as writers by 1910 had the same concept ofof the world ofhumanity as the people two hundred years ago, but since 1910, the young manwho had no actual experience of that world had no concept of it, that he hadhasbeen born into a different world, that the world he is born into is the worldthat is enclosed by all the subtle pressure to belong to something.Whatever the reason that everyone must belong to something is notthe point that I was trying to make. The fact is that, it seems to me, it isthere, that if you're going to be an eccentric, the first thing you knowyou're going to be lumped with a group of eccentrics.But isn't it just as greatlypronounced in the 19th century novels, both English and French, Dickens' Great Expectations or Stendhal's Red and the Black, the heroes in both of those novels?Aren't theybetrayed once they tried to touch out or reach out and touch society? Yes, sir, but the society theytouched was a moil and seethe of simple people. When the characternowadays reaches out to touch something, hehe touches a formula. He touchessomething that's called "labor" or called "people's democracy" or "socialwelfare" or "communism" or "anti-communism" or "Citizen's Council." He's don'ttouch just a moil and seethe of simple people functioning on man's own simpledesires to have fun at no cost or as little cost as possible.  Sir, do you feel that the code of southern chivalry as abroad moral way of lifebroad basisfor a moral way of life was ever any more thana romantic dream or romantic ideal? I would say it was moral standards which man over a long period of timehas found to be the best ones for himself and for everyone else, which had got[colored] over with a certain amount of romanticism, and bycertain participants in it had come to be acceptedthe romanticism Imeanas the most valid part of it. That if you were romantic andgallant about it, it didn't matter whether you were moral about it or not. Inthat sense itit was obsolescent, and it's a good thing it ispast, but I'm convinced it was based on simple standardsofof good, decent behavior, which would be valid at anytime. Sir, in "The Bear" is there any intended symbolism inIke McCaslin taking on the profession of carpenter ratherthan store clerk oror trainingtraining in some otherprofession? Not symbolism on my part but probably onon Ike's part, inthat the symbols which the writer puts into his work are the same symbols whichthe reader reads into it. That is, they come from a Christian background. It maybe that Ike, without stopping to rationalize it, had deliberately assumed thesymbol ofof Christ as a protest against an evil which hecould not and would not condone. He probably, at that moment, didn't have timeto hunt around and say "Oh let's see, what shall I do? I'lldo something that Christ did." He just said that "I willI will becomea carpenter." He didn't go through the process of rememberingthis wasthe symbology which he had inherited from the moment his mamataught him to say his prayers at night. That was a part of hisliterate background. Was your purpose in "The Bear" to show the growing up of a boy? I'm sorry would youWas your purpose in "The Bear" to show the growing up of a small boy? Howhe grew up? Not the growing up, but to show a small boy in conflict with the adultworld which he would have to cope with. That is, he would have to be a part ofit and be a good decent man or it would destroy him. Thethe smallboy's world is ais a world of innocence, different from the adultworld, and his job is not in putting on inches andand pounds. It is simply in adapting himself morally and mentally to the adult worldwhich he will have to be a part of, and that to me is one of themost interesting phases of man's struggle with the human dilemma, is how thechild grows up to cope with the adult world. That to me is always interesting.I've written about that lots of times for that reason. It's how the child growsup and takes the knocks and the broken head and theskinned knuckles, which he must take to become a man without being destroyed, tobring into the adult world something of theof thechild's belief in some innate goodness, or in decency, or in courage, incompassion. Sir, what do you find that makes people laugh? I would like to think it is joy in seeing that man reallycan survive his predicament. His predicament is represented by thehorrible, the outrageous things that might happen to him, yet he survives them.I would like to think that is what makes people laugh. That it is not to seeyouryour fellowman slip on a banana peel. It's to see him slip onthat banana peel, and yet he survives.I'veI've heard you use the word "fun" several times,[and I wondered what is your] idea of fun? Well, fun, let's see if I can define that. In my own case, it is toaccomplish something which makes me feelgood, which may make somebody else feel good, which won't hurt anybody. Fun isto accomplish something whichwhich I thought that perhaps Icouldn't, that I might not be brave enough or strong enough, and then I do it,and I'm successful. I suppose that everyone has a different notion of what funmeans, so I can tell you only what it means to me and what Iwhen Isay that to write for funit's to take man's dilemma,the old familiar things in which there's nothing new and can't beanything new, and by the light of my own experience andimagination and a great deal of hard work to make something which was a littledifferent, which wasn't here yesterday. People write about the same storiesbecause there's so few to write about. But to take one, human beings in the oldfamiliar dilemma and predicament and by the imagination and the hard work toshow them in some new interesting, tragic or comical instance of the strugglewithin the dilemma. That to me is fun. But then so is getting a horse over afence that I wasn't too sure he could get over, or that I would still beon him, fun. Is this fun for you right now?  Yes. Because I'm still making something which wasn't here yesterday,dealing withwith human beings which are all of you and me and Mr.McAleer in classrooms like this, and then out of this Ilearn a little more about people, and I would like to think that if some of youhere want to write, you may have learned a little more about how the writing getsdone by someone who's been at it for thirty years. It doesn't have to be a verygreat new thing, but something new might come out of it, which is what I mean bythe fun of being a writer, that anybody likes to have a captive audience to talkto probably.  You have a great knack for creating atmosphere. Do you have to go aboutit consciously, as Poe did it, or does it just sort of comenaturally? Well there'sno writing comes naturally. It's a great deal ofconcentration and hard work, because one's standards are pretty high.And I don'tknow, there are probably times when the writer's got to scrabble around andinvent, create some atmosphere. Theother times when the situation hewrites about, the characters in it, create the atmosphere. I think that everywriter has sort of a storehouse of what he has read, what he has seen andsmelled and heard and remembered. After practice, after a few years of writing,he don't have to go through his files to get what he wants. He sort of reachesone hand behind him and pulls out just what he needs for that moment. Besomething that he remembered, the way a bird in a tree looked or sounded, theway an apple tree smelled, the way dirt looked that was just ploughed, andsuddenly he's putting that down before he has had time to say, "Now I need towrite about how an apple tree smells." He's already done that. why do you think that there's so many good writers comingout of the South when there's so few people in the South that like to readliterature? Probably because the South has the leisure which is the dream of anyartist. I think that the best thing a nation can do if it reallywants peace to devote itself to things of the mind and human spirit is to pickout a good, rich nation, declare war on them and let themand let themselves get whipped. I think after the North whippedus we had nothing to do butbut to write, paint, sowe became writers. The rest of the country was too busy supporting us.  Sir, I'd like to ask a more specific question if Imay. In "An Odor of Verbena" I got the impression that Bayardhad been rather anticipating a violent death for his father for some time andwas braced for it in certain respects. Yet he still had this thing which he wasfighting all the way through the story, this "it" as he callsit, "now it can begin again." Exactly what was this feeling he had that he hadto fight off before he could  He anticipated his father's violent death. He also knew that his fatherrepresented an obsolescence.That he did not want to participate in thatobsolescence. Thethe anticipation of his father's death was notthethe anguish and grief of the loss. It was the factthat he knew that when that happened, this demand by all his tradition, all hisfamily, his father's new wife and his aunt would demand that he take a gun inhis turn and go and shed blood to pay for shed blood. And that he was not goingto do that. That's why he hated the moment when his father would meet that end,that violent end, which the boy knew his father would meet. That he would be apariah to his tradition. That he was not going to take a gun and avenge hisfather's blood. And that was the "it" that he hated. He didn't dread it. He wasgoing to accept [his fate], but that was what he meant. Thateven the war had not settled that. To any rational man the lost war should havesettled that. Men should have said, "Well, we tried blood, and that didn't work,so let's quit it." But he knew that his father, his father's generation, wouldnot do that. And that hehe believed that he would be the only one heknew that wouldwould want to accept the future. He probably didn'trealize that there were a lot of other young southerners that were willing toaccept the future. He thought he would be alone, a pariah to his country, histradition, his family, his blood, everything.But I believe that his Aunt Jenny who was of his father's generationthought it was all right. Yes'm, because as I say, women are adaptable. It's menthat cling to the old, obsolete ways. Women are adaptable, even awoman as old as Aunt Jenny. That she wasknew that she would apostate to allthe family tradition, but she was on the side of the futurelike the boy was. Sir, do you think Carson McCullers is going to be [one ofthe] leading writers in America today? That's a question that is difficult forsomebody like me to answer because I don't judge writers. To me the book is theimportant thing. It don't matter who wrote it. And some peopleanyoneis going to have bad days when what he writes is not good. The book is important.Who wrote it means nothing. I would say that she's done somesome ofthe best work in our time, but I won't say that she is the best or the worstwriter or number three or number ten. As far as your writing is concerned, what are your future plans for thenext forty or fifty years? Well I intend to keep on writing longer than just forty or fifty years. It'll take at least a hundredtofor me to get done all I want to write. And I will probably spendthat time still trying to make something new which wasn't here yesterday, becausewriting is the one occupation which never bores you becauseit'ssatiation is impossible. You never can quite do what you want todo. If what you want is money, then some day you get all the money you want. Youcan't do any more with it. But you never get done with the writing because younever quite do it as good as you think, if you live long enough, you can do ittomorrow. That's what I mean by fun. It's the one thing that you can do and never getbored with, never get tired.Are you writing anything on your stay up in Virginia? I think the writer is always cooking something up here. As he getsolder, he don't like to sit down and put it on paper. He'd rather loaf or talkto somebody or just sit and smoke. When he gets bored to a certain pitch, hewill face the job of putting it down on paper, but he never stopsinventing and weighing and discarding up here.Have you ever done any painting, Mr. Faulkner? Not seriously. Occasionally when something comes to hand or when they'repainting barns and stables and things, and I'll get a smooth piece of plank and aknife or something to smear with, and paintmules and people plowing and thingslike that, but never serious. Dogs in the woods. That sort of thing. Horses.Sir, I believe you took a walking tour through Europe [for anumber of days,] and I'm just wondering how much you got out ofthat in observing people and seeing things in Europe? Probably a great deal, though it's impossible to say. I think the writergets something from every experience. He will store that away, and at need,maybe ten or fifteen or thirty years later, he will find that he needs somethingthat he got then. He is omnivorous and amoral. He will take everything he sees,with no judgment, no discretion. Since that is the material thathe works from. But no writer can say, I think, just how much he got from what,when.Sir, I'd like to ask you a question about Sherwood Anderson's Winesburg, Ohio. In WinesburgAnderson refers toalmost every character that he refers to is tall.That is, Alice Hindman, Elizabeth Willard and Wash Williams's wife. Is there anyreason for this, using tall people, is it some sort of symbolismor? It could be that that was his first book, the first writing he did, andprobably more ofof his own subconscious wishes appearedin that than would have appeared if he had got in the habit ofwriting and discharging that young, but he was getting along towards forty yearsold when he wrote that book. He was a short man that probably allhis boyhood hadhad wished he were bigger, so he could fight[better], defend himself. It could be that that isthe reason, though it may be that he simply admired tall people, whatever thereason that some people admire tall people. But it's just possible it's becausehe himself was short. When he was sitting behind a table like this, he lookedlike a big man, but when he stood up he wasn't. And I think that he maybe wouldhave liked to have been more imposing looking. At that time he didn't realizethat probably it'sit's not how high a man is. It's what's in his facethat makes him imposing looking.Thank you, Mr. Faulkner. I speak for [all ofus.] Thank you.[background talking] Would it be better if I stood up like this?Mr. Faulkner Is David Hogganbeck in "A Courtship" an ancestor of Boon Hogganbeck in"The Bear"? Yes, that would be Boon's grandfather, probably. 1812 toyesthat would be Boon's grandfather.  in Winesburg, Ohio, SherwoodAnderson has a section in there on Jesse Bentley that doesn't seem connectedwith the rest of the book as much as the other chapters. That is, none of thepeople in there knew George Willard. There's been criticism of this. Would youcare to comment on that [as it stands]maybe your fourthsection of "The Bear," seems to bear a relation on the past to the presentwhereasis there much as much of a relationship in thissection of Winesburg, Ohio? I'm sure there was in Mr. Anderson's concept of it. I think the writerlooks on his work as an entity, that it has got to please him byits completeness, its wholeness. What seems extraneous to somebody else, to himmay seem completely necessary, that without that even though it might havebeenbeen out ofout oftune almost, wasnecessary to the work as a whole, an entity. And I'm sure that Mr.Anderson felt that his book without that was not finished, not complete. That itwasn't intact.  Malcolm Cowley has written that not one of your charactersexercises the faculty of conscious choice between goodand evil, that they seem to be haunted, obsessed and drivenor drivenby some kind of destiny. Do you think that's a validstatement? Yes, it is quite valid, inin the sense thatanyone who reads a book or story gives something tothatsomething of himself to that book or that story. It takes that.Thethe man that wrote it offers a [concept]. That is, heoffers his own opinion, which is his own concept of a fundamental truth. Someoneelse sees it, sees the same fundamental truth, but he adds something to it. Ifthe critic is intelligent, is sympathetic and isquite honest, of course, his criticism, even though I might not agree with it,is valid. And I think the writer's not the one to say that it's wrong simplybecause he doesn't agree with it. Mr. Cowley may be right. I don't think he is,but I'm not the one to say that he's wrong just because we don't agree. But atleast he brought enough attention and sympathy to the book to have a sound orvalid opinion of it, which is certainly what the critic should do. Not to writewhat the critic's own clients expect to hear from him the next time he reviews abook, but to give his concept of a piece of work, a work of art. Sir, in As I Lay Dying, do you conceive of Darl ashaving more than one reason for burning the barn where his mother's body isbeing stored for the night? He probably did. Darl was mad. His reasons arewould becompletely valid reasons if you accept his premise. It's like theman that sits on a plank full of tacks looks insaneuntil you find out he thinks he's Gandhi. Darl could have had our reasons andhis own mad reasons for what he did. Could have had any number of reasons.Thethe sane reason might be to efface a , buthis own reasons, we don't know what they might be because he was mad.  some of the prose writers in this so-called San Franciscorenaissance that's going on now feel that the novel form as a type is archaicand that it won't make any progress until they can get rid of the disciplineimposed by simple grammar, punctuation, the language in general. I wonder howyou'd react to this idea [of theirs]. I think the manner, the method is not tooimportant. The writer is simply trying to arrest in one dramatic moment aninstant of man's struggle within the human dilemma. I think that he should usewhatever method seems the best to him to do that. But I don't think that becausehe believes that his method is the best one that all other methods arebad. And I think that if anyone is going to waste his time tryingto abolish the form of the novel, then he's not going to get muchgood work done. To use whatever form iscomes to hand that does hisjob. If it's a moving picture camera, use that. If he'd rather use paint,use that. If he'd ratherif he thinks he can do it better with signlanguage, assuming that he can communicate with enough readers, use that. Iimagine that any form is going to change, but I don't thinkthat we will see the time when folks will get rid of grammar andpunctuation. You use the term human dilemma. What do you describe as a humandilemma? The environment in which man, frail and fragile, with all his impulses,his lusts, greeds, also his conscience, whatever it is that makes him want to bebetter than he is and makes him, even when he's responsible for it, hate thecondition in which the weak suffer and anyone is hungry [which willalways occur]. That he would like to alter that. He hasn't beenable to so far, yet he doesn't quit trying. His dilemma is toarrange the world in which he lives, in which heand where he camewithout anyany choice, into a condition in which he can get the mostfor his money, you might say. His dilemma is his struggle with his own natureagainst his conscience. Call that God or whatever you like. But whatever it isthat makes man want to be better than he is and that he is afraidhe may be able to be. That he wants to be braver than he is afraid he might be.He wants to be more honest than he's afraid he might be able to be. And hewantswants peace. He wants happiness, what he calls happiness. Andhis dilemma is his struggle and striving to get that.Iin The Sound and the Fury, Mr.Faulkner, Jason Compsonis one of your most memorable characters. To me,he is one of the meanest, orneriest people who I have ever conceived of. Now, ifit's not a personal question, have you ever known anyone who was anywhere nearas mean and as hateful as Jason Compson? I hope I haven't. No writer worth his salt is going to believe thatanybody can create better people thanthan he can, more villainous ormore saintly. And so I prefer to believe that there ain't anybody quite that badbecause I would have lost the trick.  [I have found that] a number of characters,particularly in Absalom, Absalom! and The Sound and the Fury, have a great obsession with time and throughtheir conception of time which oftentendsto define their characters. In other words, anobsession with the past or with the future oror placing timealtogether out of theas the sum of their characters,theirtheirtheir own characters to their own detriment. Andthat Dilsey, perhaps, and Lena, who approach time in a cyclical order, andtherefore have been able to make more order out of their lives. PerhapsI have [that in] an inverted order, but I wonder if you wouldifyou would comment on that. Well, of course a part ofof man's dilemma, the individualdilemma, is that man, individual man, is the victim of his past. Actuallythere'sthere's no such thing as "me," probably, that I am aconglomeration of a lot of "us."Probably a great deal ofof man'sbehavior is from a pattern that was fixed long before he entered it. Heinherited it, that he can't help doing some of the thing he does. He can't helphis attitude toward that that hehe has. Hehemight be educated out of them. I think that the wisepersonI mean wise in the sense that Dilsey was wise, to do the bestshe could with what she had, she would know by instinct that shemustmust abolish the past. That she must acceptaccept"now," and accept the moment in which "now" becomes "will be."That she must be intact in "now" rather than to have one foot inside "now," andthe rest ofof the body in "yesterday," if she is to cope withenvironment. I don't know whether that makes any clearer what you asked or not.Does it?  I have two questions about your short story, "Lo!"And thefirst one is what is the relation of the chief, Francis Weddell, to the Indianswhich we see in "A Courtship" or "Red Leaves" ? Simply anotheranother clan. They were the same Chickasawpeople. That was just another clan. They may have been related by marriage, evenby blood, but they had begun to take white names by that time. Whenasthey became plantation owners and held U.S. commissions.But hewasbelonged to the same lot of people as Issetibbeha and hisdescendants.Well, Mr. Faulkner could you tell me when Weddell takes his Chickasaws toWashington, takes his nephews and besieges the president, whether this is justthe action of a naive savage or whether he, all the time, is planning on gettingthe best of the President? I think that required a great deal of shrewdness, that he was no longerin a position to take his spears and bows and arrows and his warriors and gothere and get what he wanted, so he used the white man's tactics.I thinkthat he was pretty shrewd about that, that he just behaved in a naive andinnocent way, but he wasn't. That he hadhad abolished the past andhad taught himself pretty fast to cope with "now," with environment.  I have a couple of questions about TheSound and the Fury. The first one, is Quentin the daughter of DaltonAmes. Do you remember that? Yes.She is? Yes.And the second one, how do you think Quentin would have turned out ifJason wouldn't have been hounding her the all the time? Would she haveturned out well or ? I don't know. That whole family was against her. I doubt if any child asinsecure as she wasto know, suspect that she wasinsecure, could have coped with that family of adults, with nobody to defend herexcept the Negro woman. Probably she was doomed in any environmentshe would have found herself in.I had the impression that she would have turned out fine if ithadn't have been for Jason. I can't say. I'mI'm inclined to think that she was doomed,that no matter what the environment would have been, she was still doomed.That's certainly poetically necessary in the book, that she be. That was the reason forpart of the reason for heruncle's Quentin's tragedy. I mean the poetic reason, not the actualreason. In The Sound and the Fury you said that MauryCompson's name was changed to Benjamin. You mention it a number of timesvarious places in the book.What was the purpose of changing his name andwhywhat was the importance of [the change] ? Maury was his mother's brother, the only brother, and they were a proudnamed family. This child was given that proud name, and when he began to appearto be an idiot, they didn't want him named Maury, so they changed hisname. Sir, is there anything significance in the fact that at one point in The Sound and the Fury T.P.says that Benjy was not only deafdumb but also deaf? No, no, Benjy wasn't really deaf, but in T.P.'s concept,ifif you'reyou're "deaf and dumb," that meansyou can't talk, and youyou just don't have any sense. And he wassaying "You're deaf 'cause youyou won't do what I tell you to do." Hedidn't mean that Benjy couldn't hear because he knew Benjy could. But that wasT.P.'s exasperation with this creature who was bigger than he was and yet wasmore trouble than an infant. No, that was just his name. Versh's name, back in slavery times, had probably been Virgil, and thenhis people couldn't spell it, and it passed from son to son and finally wound upas Versh. It may have gone from Virgil to Verge, and then it got to be Versh.Mr. FaulknerThis gentleman.Sir, in As I Lay Dying which of Addie's childrenhas the most lovelove for her and why? I would say that Jewel did.That Jewel himself didn't know why he did.He was a child of love. That he was illegitimate. And he and hismother were closer. He didn't know why. She did. And I imagineandalso by his nature, that he was not the child ofof hisshiftless father who loved nothing but his own comfort, that Jewel had inheritedsomething of [warmth] from his father. Sir, we're talking about names. Just as we learn that Eck Snopes isreally named Eckrum, is there any longer name for I.O., Mink, and Flem? No, that's like T.P.'s name, the I.O. And MinkMink was anorphan. He was raised by some kin people, and he himself had never heard himselfcalled anything but Mink. Someone asked him in aa bookI'm at now what his name is. He says, "Mink." He says, "Is that all the nameyou've got?" He says, "That's all I know." And he's asked, "What did your mothercall you?" He said, "I don't know. She died." That hehe doesn't know.That's all he's heard cause he's raisedpassed from hand to hand,anybody that would feed a child like a stray dog.  would you say a few words about the significance of the Easter servicein The Sound andthe Fury? Only that, at that point, it seemed to me that was needed, just asthethe musician will put certain chords or themes orphrases into what he's doing. He himself may not know why. It seems obvious tohim that something like that was needed, and that's the best he could do. It maybe counterpoint to the dreary scene in the house with that selfishwoman, the mother, and this child who's taken out of the house tojustso the womanhis own mother wouldn't be bad with him istaken to church with these people goingtrying to followthe white man's concept ofof the passion story.Foremphasis I suppose. [Waswas there resentment among the colored peopleabout] Benjy going to church [with Dilsey]? No, no, none whatever. Sir, at one point in that Easter service, Dilsey mentions that she hasseen the beginning and the end. What was it that referred to? Was it religion or is it the family? It's the family. She sees that there's doom on the family.Therethere may have been one hopewas thatgirl, Quentin. And Quentin is gone. The doom which Dilsey had been fightingagainst all her life had happened. And she saw the first of it, and she did thebest she could, and now she's seen the end.All that remains is an idiot boythat she takes to an Easter service in a Negro church that he can't evenunderstand. Sir, in As I Lay Dying is there anysignificancesignificancesignificance in the fact thatVardaman catches the fish at the beginning, and keeps comparing thedeath of it to that of his mother rather than it being some otheranimal, perhaps? Yes. That's a question that's a littlelittle hard for me toanswer because anything in the book has some need, more than significance. Therewas a need, it seemed to me, that that should be there. The connection, Ifelt, of the transference that the little boy madebetween the dead fish and the blood and his dead mother was aninstance of a child's rationalizing, thinking. But there were no symbolismintended there. No I don't. I don't know who did that. Of coursethethe symbolism was simply the powers ofofdarkness and of light wrestling, struggling. I don't know whose idea that jacketwas or who did it. Sir, the title of The Sound and theFury is taken from Macbeth's speech, [isn'tit]? Yes, yes. There must havebe at least a dozen books named fromthat one speech. It seems that one of the tragedies of Quentin Compson[that] was the greatest is the inability to[view] himself at all in [time]. Hehas the obsession to begin with, and thenconfused, and then he battlestime altogether, mechanical andnatural time, he destroys his clock, and he puts himself in the future andlooks back at himself. He's totally confused and yettotally obsessed with time, trying to put it in some rational understanding forhimself, and he fails.And I kind of wonder if his failure after anattempted intellectual approach, and Dilsey's success [at] more of an emotional approach, which seemed toindicate a [collective] attempt at trying to relate to time,to live with time [from a natural] perspective, cannot be reached inan intellectual, rational manner but more or less comes from anemotional or instinctive [comprehension]. Remember Quentin was not trying to put time into perspective. He wastrying to escape from time into the past. He was trying to escape back into atime when all this which I hate was not. He failed, and so he committed suicide.There was only one more step left to him. He couldn't be alive and escape backbefore when his sister was pure. And so he had to commit suicide. That was allthat remained for him. Dilsey accepted the past, and she didn't waste herselftrying to discard it or get away from it. She simply accepted it and said,"All right. So it is. Let's go on. Let's go forward." That time wasin its perspective, I think, for the both of them, butbut one of themhated "now" and wanted to return to "was," which you can't do because what was,is. There's actually no such thing as "was." As we said any man is the victimofnot only victim, but the sum of his past. He never escapes from it.Quentin wanted to escape back into it. how real are thethese amorousexploits of Gerald Bland in The Sound and the Fury?Isis he just bragging, trying to live up to his mother's dramaticconception of him or does he really ? I suspect that most of them are lies.That he would be like any fictioneernothing that happened would be quiteas good as what he could imagine. So the ones that actuallyhappened would be dull to him. The ones he told about were probably alllies.Did Quentin, before, actually have a conversation with his father aboutsleeping with his sister? Or was that part of his ? He never did. He said, "If I were brave I wouldI might say this to my father, whether it was a lie or not." Oror, "IfI wereif I would say this to my father, maybe he could answer me backthe magic word which would relieve me of this anguish and agony which I livewith." No, they were imaginary. He just said "Suppose I say this to my father.Would it help me?" I live with. No, they were imaginary. He just said, "Suppose Isay this to my father, would it help me? Would it clarify? Would I see clearerwhat it is that I anguish over?" Yes, yes. But in Caddy's opinion he was such aweakling that even if they had been no kin, she would never had chosen him forher sweetheart. She would have chosen one like the ex-soldier shedid, but never anybody like Quentin. No. No, Caddy seemed a nice name for her, and I had to think ofsomething to justify it. Mr. Faulkner You said that your vision of Caddy was one of the things that started youon the novel. What qualities other than bravery seem to you to make her such aperson that you could feel that strongly about? She was independent herself. She was confident. She was compassionateenough to take care of the idiot child. That was no burden to her.Ifher mother never had to say "Caddy, I want you to look afterBenjamin this afternoon." Because she loved him. She would have done thatanyway. And she was convinced that she could do the best for him. If what shecouldn't do, Dilsey would tend to, [with that] Benjamin wouldbe all right with her. She could look after him. And that she could take care ofall of them. If there was something that would be pleasant for them to do, shewould run the affair. I'm curious about Jasonthat Negro boytells him to keep his hands out of his pockets, because he's falling on hisface all the time.He stumbles. Why, was he fat and clumsy when he was younger? Probably that was a mannerism, keeping his hands in his pocket. To me,that presaged his future, something of greediness and grasping,selfishness. That he may have kept his hands in his pocket to guard whatevercolored rock that he had found that was for himrepresented themillion dollars he would like to have someday. In the thumbnail sketch you describedescribe Luster as being aman of fourteen capable of taking care of an idiot and entertaining him at thesame time. Whywhy do you consider Luster a man? Because he could do a man's job. At this time the idiot was twice hissize, was actually dangerous. The idiot, by that time, was a man,and yet Luster at fourteen could cajole him when necessary, could trick him,could even apply enough physical force when necessary to keep him in hand. It'slike the lion tamer is a man. It means simply that he's big enoughfor his job. That's what LusterI meant by that. In Luster'sterminology, a man is anyone who is big enough to do what he has todo. Sir, in part two of The Sound and the Fury, thelittle Italian girl following Quentin, is this torepresent ? I'm sorry. I don't remember her. I'll have to get that book and look atit.I can't remember her. MaybeMr. Gwynn could prompt me a little there? Is that in Cambridge?Yes, sir, or outside of Cambridge Well, I mean when he is at Harvard. Well, that's probably what it was. Nosymbolism. It washe had aatenderness, an admiration forfor women, for girls andalso a sublimation of the concept of virginity after his tragicsituation with his sister. It may be that's what it was.Does Quentin commit suicide by jumping in the river or? Yes, by drowning. Yes.  you say that thesome things you don'tknow exactly why you put them in.Would you say that the so-calledpsychological critics could now [tell] you why you put them into yourbooks? A good psychologist certainly could or he would be a bad psychologist ifhe couldn't.I think that onereads a book from the same jumping off place that one writes a book, that onereads a book from his own background ofof observation, imagination,and experience, too.That no one man can put into a book what a dozen mencancan read into it.But don't you think artistic control keeps the psychologist fromanalyzing the writing  No'm, I don't think so. Maybe I don't understand what you mean byartistic control.Well, don't you have to put the things in a certain order, objectifythem, and make them just the opposite from what a psychologist [wantsthem] ? I wouldn't think so. The writer is writing from his ownobservation, imagination, experience, and out of the same background which thepsychologist operates from. That is, from thecall it Christianity,the Caucasian race. The same background of education, ofenvironment, which is the same timeperiod in time, and they wouldhave some of the identical ideas which came from that near to identicalbackgrounds, which are identical in the period of time, in theculture of the country, of the speech, of the literature. Sir, in As I Lay Dying, what was the significanceof Darl's lying in front of his mother's coffin after it was saved from thefire? Darl was mad. He did things which it seemed to me hehe had todo, or he insisted on doing. His reasons I couldcould try torationalize to suit myself, or even if I couldn't rationalize hisreasons to please me, I had to accept the acts because Darl insisted on doingthat. I mean that any character that you write takes charge ofhis own behavior. You can't make him do things once he comes alive and stands upand casts his own shadow. Darl did things which I'mI'm sure were forhis own mad reasons, quite logical. I couldn't always understand why he didthings, but he did insist on doing things, and when we wouldwouldquarrel about it, he always won,because atthat time he was alive. He was under his own power.  you mentioned that your characters are [struggling] to cope with the dilemma oflife. Are any of them actually successful in reaching a point where life isnotdoes not present itself as a dilemma? Well, they reach a point where life is no longer aanuncopeable dilemma. There is one, a sewing machine agent called Ratliff,that handled living pretty well. There are others that handled itpretty well. I think Dilsey did, though hers was tragic. But it neverdidit might have dented her head a little, but itnever beat her to her knees. Ratliff got along quite well with it, because herealizedrecognized his own limitations and the fact that the dilemma,although it was insoluble, was not uncopeable with. I think FlemSnopeshe coped with it pretty well. Where did you find all your information on the ChickasawIndians? Are there records ? Yes'm. Therethere are records there, but I never did do muchresearch. I wouldI probably got my information about Indians as I'vegot it about most of the other things I know, from listening to people andadding a little imagination to it. I suspect that no Chickasawwould recognize my Chickasaws,but people thatdo know more about Mississippi's history don't quarrel too much with my pictureof Chickasaw Indians. And also, I have known some of their descendants. Theyhave mixed with white people or with Negroesare still in my country.And I don't think that people are all that different no matterwhat color they are.That people are different more because of the pressure oftheir environment than because of their blood.  accept and endure throughout your workmeaning of that? That probably refers to man getting along within the human predicament. That you've got to accept it because the only other choice is to cut yourthroat. If you cope with it, within your capacity to give when it's strongerthan you, then you endure. And the only alternative to enduring is alsoto cease. And man is here through no choice of hisown. He hasas far as he knows he's not going anywhere else, and if hedoes anything with what time he knows who he is, it will have to be while he ishere, and he had better, I think, teach himself to accept the predicament and toendure in it and still get as much pleasure as he can without doing harm toanyone. Or if he's bent on doing good to people, that's well enough. Let himuplift man. But in order to accomplish anything, to be a writer, to bea doctor, to do anything well, toeven to have fun, you'vegot to accept the predicament and endure in it. I wonder how did you happen to have come up with the title The Sound and the Fury from Macbeth, and I thought that perhaps it came from thespeechI mean the speech that it came from"all our yesterdays"of Macbeth himself,and I wondered if [there was any merit in] the analogy of thecharacter Macbeth who having created his own chaos, inflicts it on life and theuniverse [with the same actions of Quentin Compson] ? No, it came simply from the words themselves,the ringing sound of the phrase"A tale told by an idiotfull of sound and fury." It had nothing to do withwith Macbeth'scharacter. It was simply from the phrase. [The part of] Benjy is the tale told by an idiot, Iwould assume. Yes.Yes, the book began as a short story. Benjamin, of course, was adeliberate choice from the biblical Benjamin. Sorry.I was wondering in your Indian stories again, "Lo!" and "A Courtship" andin "A Justice," except for the framework, your storiesthese storiesare very humorous, but in "Red Leaves," while there is a good deal of wry humor,that story seems to be much more serious, and I wondered if you'd care tocomment. Only, in primitive peoplesI mean by primitive peoplesa small group which are obsolete inside anotherculturethe distance between what is humor and what istragic is never very great, that itit may befunny nowbut you better watch out. That was simply that the sameconditions, the same ingredients, with just a little more or little less fireunder it might make something completely different. That theimplacable pursuit of that poor Negro was funny to anybody but him, and thatnotand also it was not funny to the Indians that had to stop sittingdown to get up and walk him down to catch him. But thepicture ofof those lazy people that didn't want to do that havingto catch that Negro, to me, was funny. But the result, the purposeof it, was anything but funny. The Indians that went to call on PresidentJackson was funny, but it wasn't funny to the Indians and certainly wasn't veryfunny to President Jackson. [I was wondering ] [what you call inheritance but in the moment that you state]? I think what I intend to say is man's immediate behavior is the result of the pressure of his environment. Thethemethod in which he behaves, of course, is heredity. [You think it is more or less]? I'm sorry.[If it does not change very much]? I think that heredity, if the word means anything, must be a constantfactor. That would not change. It would alter. It would evolve. Man's behavior,which at one moment is this and inunder another situation is that, isbecause of the pressure of the immediate environment. But irregardless ofhis blood, his heritage, circumstance will compel himto make choices. He will make the choice according to the pressureof the environment. Ma'am.[The future to youyou feel is done].[for that moment you can more or less predict] [from that moment their behavior] ? Maybe we mean different things byby environment. When I usethat term I mean the immediate conditions ofofof a moment.The environment that hashas shaped a child's character from the timeit was born until it's ten years old has become a part of heritage, by thattime. I use environment as the immediate moment. That is, environment, to me,now is us in this room.Does this mean that young Bayard Sartoris, for example, inherited deathby violence? Death by violence was a part of his past. It wasaa part of the creed of his family. He inherited thatcreed. He didn't have to function according to it. Which he didn't,he refused to do that. Because he was sayingtrying torepudiate the past, not to cling to it. His tradition was thatdeath by violence came sooner or later if you stuck to the creed of aneye-for-an-eye, blood-for-blood, and the emptiness of that sort ofpride. That was his inheritance.But his behavior was because of hisenvironment, which hadwhich was the result of a lost war in whichpeople should have had enough of blood-for-blood and an eye-for-an-eye. Thatthat solved nothing. Sir, do you recall a short story you wrote called "Delta Autumn"? I wonder what would be the comment of Flem Snopes if such a story weretold to him as being true? Why, I suppose he wouldhe wouldn't be too interested in itbecause there would be no percentage in going to the woods for two weeks just toshoot deer. He would be familiar with it. It would be aafoolish way to spend two weeks. Was that what you meant? [different stories.] Isthis is the storywhere thegoing off to Arizona [with this Negro woman].Isn't that part of the story of "Delta Autumn"? "Delta Autumn" was a camp of deer hunters in whicha young woman, a Negress, the discarded mistress ofof oneof the white hunters, came to the camp to see him.That was the part of the story that I was referring to, that what Flem Snopes' comment would be on thatsort of thing happening within his environment. Well, that was his environment. He lived there, too. He just didn't godeer hunting. He probably hadhad children by a Negro womanhimself.  No, no,only the [Faulkner laughing] no, onlyonly the Compsonfamily Only that Compson family. That they had refused to accept now andtomorrow. And there's no place for them in now because they wouldn't accept it.Or maybe that's backward, if there had been a place for them, they wouldn't havebeen Compsons. No, that's what Dilsey meant by the first and thelast. It was the Compsons, that family. That was Quentin's thought. It's notMississippians nor folks in Jefferson, butbut "us Compsons are doomed,that we have had it." Oh, thank you all. Today we are very fortunate to have as our special guest Mr. WilliamFaulkner of Oxford, Mississippi, the celebratedjustly celebratedsouthern writer of fiction and winner of the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1949.Our panel is somewhat larger than usual today, as several of the students frommy English 32 class have joined us. In addition to Mr. Robert Kellogg of theDepartment of English, one of our regular panel members, we have with usalso today Mr. Houk, Mrs. Massey, Miss Winslow, Miss Taylor, Miss Marston, Mr.Bagley, Mr. Nesbit, Mr. Miller, Mr. Carlson and Miss Frame ofthe class in the history of the English language who are here to ask Mr.Faulkner some questions about his use of dialect and other questions concerninglanguage in his fiction writing. And I suppose without further ado we might aswell start on the questions. Mr. Houk, will you lead off with the first question, please?  That's correct. It was translated back to Doom not by him but by hisassociates trying to pronounce his French name, given to him by the Frenchadventurer who called himself the Chevalier Soeur-Blonde de Vitry, that he metin New Orleans. That was simply an anglicization of the French De l'homme. No, I would certainly like to think I'd invented that. I'd like to ask you about your use of "aint" in thedialogue of your characters. In particular, in As I LayDying. When Anse Bundren is talking to Vernon Tull he says, "I aintasking it of you, he says, I can always do it for me and mine. I aint asking you torisk your mule. It aint your dead; I am not blaming you." Now why do you havethe switch betweenfrom "aint" to "am not"? "Am not" is more positive.So you use the "am not" when you are definite  Yes, to be very positive, yes. Otherwise they would have said"aint." in The Portable Faulkner the editorsays, "Incidentally the title of the novel has nothing to do with Augustsunlight; it refers to Lena Grove and her baby. In the Mississippi backwoods, itis sometimes said of a pregnant woman, but more often of a mare or cow, that shewill be light in August or September." Is this how you meant it tobethe title? No, I never heard of that. It refers to a texture of the light in Augustin my country, in a spell of two or three cool days we call "blackberry winter."It's the light. I had never heard that business of after the cow drops the calfshe's light in August.And thatyou don't know that expression at all. No.I haven't heard it in Georgia either.I suppose people have spoken to you of it since then? Yes. in connection with this class in particular, we've beenvery interested in reading about names in America, about personal andgeographical names. I wonder to what extent the names that you use parallelthose that have actually occurred in your lifetime, or in any history that youmay have learned. I think any writer is very careful always not to use actual names if hecan help it because a great deal of his time would be taken up explaining to theactual owner of that name that he didn't refer to him, was not impugning hischaracter nor his past nor his parentage.Originally in "The Spotted Horses" story, weren't you going to call thesewing machine salesman Suratt, and then you met somebody by that name so youchanged the name to Ratliff, [didn't you]? Yes, that's right. does the speech of Sartoris in the story "Ad Astra" haveany special dialect qualities? Is it a southern speech, or is it just the speechof an average educated American? It would be the speech of a limited young man, who had no particulareducation. It was a speech he had heard from his associates back on hisMississippi plantation, colored just a little by what he had listened to servingwith English troops probably. Ek Snopes uses the archaic word "[lief]"in "I'd just as lief let them stay out there." Is this word still common inMississippi? Oh yes, there are any number of words derived from lowland Scottish inMississippi country people's talk. They say "to ret up a room."That "leif"it may be just my owninexperience, but I haven't come across that in Georgia. I wonderitmay be a difference between the speech of Georgiapopular speech, folkspeech in Georgia and in Mississippi. I remember being struck by that too,because I wasn't familiar with it in Georgia speech. to what degree do you consider dialect in speech importantin characterization? I think you can't draw a character simply by putting dialect into hismouth. It is important as a part of the picture of the man, an indigenouspicture of the individual. In that sense it's important, that is a man willspeak according to his nature, his degree and his geography.Here's an example,that might have a bearing on that. Inthe story "Barn Burning," the little boy, Sarty Snopes, uses the forms, thegrammatical forms, "ourn" and "hisn." What do these tell the reader about thespeaker, would you say? That he came from an uneducated class of white people.Those terms are in use in the southern mountains more than in thelowlands, I think, in the South, more than in the coastal plains of the South.Is there any implication that these people are from mountain extraction oranything of that sort? Yes, they're people whose dialect has not been colored at all by thetalk ofof Negroes. They are mountain people, where there are not manyNegroes. Their speech is harsher. The "r" is more definite than the "r" in thewhite child that has lived with Negroes.Yes. Of course that's an old controversy, whether the Negroes learnedtheir speech from the white people, or whether the white people were influencedby the Negroes. I guess we'd better not get into thatit's toocomplicated a question. again from Sartoris: Old Man Falls is astrong dialect characterization. How did you arrive at his speech, and whatlevel of society is he intended to represent? He represents the older class of Southerner. He was notquite illiterate in his time as theas a Snopes would be in his. Hehad a close association with people that were literate. But he too belongs tothe class whose ancestors owned no slaves. I was wondering, from your short story "That EveningSun"there's a section when Jason talks with Nancy, he says, I'mquoting now, "'I didn't have fun,' Jason said. 'You hurt me. You put smoke in myeyes. Y'awl made me come.'" And I wonder, are you using "y'awl" there asadirected at Nancy? In other words, is heis thatsingular? No, no, never.You've never used "y'awl" in the singular? Never singular.Have you ever heard it used in the singular? No.I never have either. I'll bear you out on that. Not by a southerner.I've heard northerners use it in the singular.  there's a traditional character in literature, Sophonisba,who was the daughter of Hasdrubal, and the subject of many tragedies. She is notknown too much today, I don't think, but your character from the short story"Was," from Go Down, Moses I believe, Miss Sophonsiba Ibelieve is the way you pronounce her name, is thatis the change ofthat "s" from Sophonisba to Sophonsiba, a change just of the "s" not of theaccent, is that youris that intentional? Intentional in this sense: to imply that the people ofof herherclass and her time werewere involved withwith books, with culture, but they werecareless with it too, and they would mispronounce the names, they would takeclassical names and give to the Negro slaves and would probably mispronouncethem, so that after the Negro had passed it on to his children it becamesomething else, but at one time it came out of the classics, that someone whohad read the Latin or the Greek had seen it.We've sort of talked around this. I was wondering, do you have any key bywhich you go to make a distinction between the dialogue of yourvariousthe various levels of your characters, such as between theCompsons, the Snopes, the Negroes, and the Indians and so forth? Is thereanything that you use as a distinction between these two, between all ofthese? No, of course not deliberately. It's aa conceptthat the Compson would speak a little differently from a Snopes, or from anintermediate between Compson and Snopes. That's a matter of theear, that these peoplewhen a writer gets the character properly onhis feet, the character takes charge of things. The character says, "This is whatI'm going to say, you put it down."Thank you very much, Mr. Faulkner. Our time will not permit furtherquestioning at this session, but be with us again next week, when again ourWriter in Residence, Mr. William Faulkner of Oxford, Mississippi, will be withthe members of the English 32 class in order to answer questions concerning hisuse of dialect and of language in general in his fiction. With us on the paneltoday have been Mr. Robert Kellogg of the Department of English, and various andsundry members of the English 32 class whose names I haven't time to mention atthis time. This is Edward Stevenson with the Department of English, asking youto be again with us at the same time next week for another session on this samesubject.We're very happy to bring you again today our Writer in Residence at theUniversity, Mr. William Faulkner of Oxford, Mississippi, who has consented tospeak to the members of the English 32 class in the history of the Englishlanguage concerning matters involving his use of dialect or any feature of hisuse of language in his fiction. Our panel is therefore somewhat larger thanusual. Besides myself and Mr. Kellogg of the Department of English, we have Mr.Houk, Mrs. Massey, Miss Winslow, Miss Taylor, Miss Marston, Mr. Bagley, Mr.Nesbit, Mr. Miller, Mr. Carlson and Miss Frame of the English32 class. And now without further ado, Miss Winslow, will you please lead off with the first question? I doubt if there can be any rule about that. I think that anything, theshorter it's said the better. I think that stories titlethemselves quite often. Yes, in that anything, the shorter it's said the betterit is."Long" is agood long title, or "Wash." this might sound like a typical question from a proudVirginian, but how did you arrive atatarrive at the nameJefferson for the town? I told that in a book called Requiem for a Nun.It was the mail carrier, in 1811 or '12 it was, who brought the mail into what wasthen an Indian trading post hadhad been a tenant on Mr. Jefferson'splace, one of Mr. Jefferson's places here in Albemarle County. It's an involved,long story, but it explains how they named the town Jefferson.Well that's interesting. I never knew that it really was connected withThomas Jefferson. Very good. in your writing of dialogues, do you present the words ofyour characters as they would have spoken them? Or do you just use a touch ofdialect to color the character? I think best to use as little dialect as possible because itconfuses people who are not familiar with it. That nobody should let thecharacter speak completely in his own vernacular.It's best indicated by a fewsimple, sparse but recognizable touches. One has to take liberties to that extent. I think that some of thethings that Huck Finn recorded he couldn't have done at his age. That's theliberties which the writer must take in order to make his story clear andinteresting. Yes, that his point of view is still that of his age, even though hisdiction may not be.Sir, would you make any distinction between what, say, a southernmountain character would say in 1920 and what he would say in 1950, or is itjust all what you heard when you were in ? I think that his vernacular, his dialect wouldn't alter somuch as his vocabulary might increase a little because of radio andand booksand newspapers which he can get or he can't escape from getting in1950 which he couldn't get in 1910 or '20.Let me put in a sort of a variation on that question. Do you try to makeany distinction between what you conceive today to be the speech, say, of the1880s and maybe the 1920s? No more than we just stated, the vocabulary might change butthe diction wouldn't. in listening to several of your talks I find it sort of curious and rather remarkable that often you use what is generally considered to be badgrammar, for instance "he dont," "aint." Do you have a conscious intent intalking in this manner? No.Is it acertainly I have no question that you know what goodgrammar is . Is it just a recollection in your mind of the speechin Mississippi at the ? Probably old muscular habits in speech, if you will agreethat speech can have old muscular habits, just like the arm orthe hand can. To me that's not really too important, that a little bad grammardon't hurt anything.That's really more old fashioned, I think, than anything else. Probably, yes.You findyou find for instance things like "he don't" in theletters of Lord Byron, I've noticed.Sir, do you think that the dialect or speech of the southern Negro is adeterrent to his progress ? No, I shouldn't think that anyone's speech should be adeterrent to his progress if he just don't use too much of it. I think a lotof Well put. I think a lot of people talk too much. the wife in "The Fire and the Hearth,"an educatedNegro woman, seems in direct contrast to Old Man Falls in Sartoris. This is a transcription of her speech: "Where are you goingthis time of night? Messing around up yonder in the bottom all last night!Getting back home just in time to hitch up and get to the field a good hourafter sunup." Whereas Old Man Falls is: "Cunnel was settin' thar in a cheer, hissock feet propped on the po'ch railin', smokin' this hyer very pipe." Since thecopyright date on Sartoris is 1929 and the copyright dateon Go Down, Moses, from which "The Fire and the Hearth"is taken, is much later, does this difference in truein therepresentation of dialect indicate a definite trend on your part, or is thismerely a social difference? I would say it's a social difference, that the Negro woman maybe had alittle more to say to tell the story, which gets back to what we just spoke of.Also she had been associated with a better class of whitea moreliterate, cultured class of white people for more of her life than Old Man Fallshad. It may be the Negro woman had a little more chance to talk than Old ManFalls had. there has appeared in AmericanSpeech magazine some articles on the southern dialect, and it pointsout certain peculiarities about the Southern dialect. Now these articles werewritten by men whoin the Mississippi and Louisiana area. Theinconsistency seems to appear in the fact that some of these examples that theyshow are not consistent with examples shown in the Georgia dialect, or perhapsinin the Carolinas. My question is this: do you think that there could possibly bea split in the southern dialect, between the Carolinas and Georgia, and perhapsdraw a rough line down Alabama, and have a different dialect on your side?Sort of two subdialects, maybe an eastern and a western division of theSouthern dialect?That's right. I'm not too certain of that. I do know the dialect in some parts ofMississippi and Louisiana has been colored a little by French and Spanishinfluence. I think that the dialect would be consistent more by contour lines.As Mr. Stevenson spoke of, the people of the lowlands speak differently from thepeople in the hills, so the people in the north Alabama hills and east Tennesseehills and Georgia hills would speak a dialect. The people in the flatlands ofGeorgia, the flatlands of Alabama and Mississippi would speak a dialect, whichwould be almost identical. The people along the coast would speak a dialectcolored just a little by the influence of Spanish and French and Creole.In connection with this, sir, Wash Jones uses speech characterized by thefollowing: "air" for "are," "yit" for "yet," and "hit" for "it," and variousothers of course. Although we know from our studies in our class that this isgenerally common Southern speech, many of your characters on somewhat the samesocial plane as Wash Jones do not use this type of speech. In the genealogy atthe rear of theAbsalom, Modern Library Absalom, Absalom!, Wash Jones is said toit'ssaid that the date and location of his birth is unknown. Could we assume possiblythat he comes fromfrom somewhere in Tennessee, if he uses thisspeech? From a hill country, yes.Here's a question I'd like to get in before our time runs out, about alinguistic device that writers often use, more commonly seen in poets perhapsthan in prose fiction, in poetry rather than in prose fiction.Irefer to the use of alliteration. And let me read you a sentence from "BarnBurning," and note the alliteration on the "s" sounds. "His two hulkingsisters"this is the little boy's point of view"His twohulking sisters in their Sunday dresses and his mother and her sister in calicoand sunbonnets were already in it, sitting on and among the sorry residue of thedozen and more movings which even the boy could remember." Was that a conscioususe of alliteration, or is it just happenstance? Happenstance.Sure enough.Do you ever use alliterationconsciously? No, I don't have time.I mean by thatthe writer is too busy getting the story down before he forgets it to bother toomuch about his grammar or his style or the tricks he might use.But in the process of revision mightn't you scratch out sometimes andsubstitute something which you think would sound a little better? A reviser would but nobody is going to revise if he can help it. Thatis, nobody revises for fun. If it's all right he lets it go. The publisher cancorrect the grammar if he thinks it's needed.Well, I see our time has run out. I want to thank Mr.Faulkner [very much]  that there was a possibility of meeting with you, wethought it might be an opportunity for us to get together and talk about some ofthese [things]. That's good. You'll find a complete amateur in me. I don't know whetheryou can find anything in me that would interest the people in yourprofession.Well, I think thatthat we've decidedmaybe we're the amateurs in a great many respects. [Some of] your people that you selectof course, they're unusualpeople, in a way. Do you select them as unusual? Or [I guess there's]atype that seems to appeal to you? I doubt if I know whether I select these people or theyselect me. I think that the writer is trying to takesome comic or tragic moment of man in his struggle inside the human conditionand tell it in some form which other people would find comic or tragic.Ias far as I know, I am dealing simply with people inthe condition that I have seen people.That these people, to me,seem quite sane and quite normal, even ones that are mad, seem tome quite sane people. Probably that's because the writer has already acceptedthe premise if the man believes he's Mahatma Gandhi, so when he lies on aboard full of tacks, he's a rational creature.By "mad" [do you mean] by society's ? Thethe character in the book As I Lay Dying, Darl, one of the sons, was mad, associety would call him mad. To me, he wasn'twasn't mad. Or, that is,I didn't set out to say, "Now, one of these brothers will have to be mad, so Iwill invent a good mad one according to what I do know of the rules ofinsanity." I was just writing about what was, to me, a pitiable,tragic human being.And you haven't had much experience in state hospitals or anything? None whatever. None whatever. I think you don't need to go to statehospitals to find people that society calls mad. There certainly seems to be a common denominator of interest. So oftenthe psychiatrist is interested in much of the same area of human function thatcomes out in so-called madness or in the different individuals[who are crazed and things]. It seems to me a very definitesimilarity in at least perception, interest, on the part of the novelist and thepsychiatrist, perhaps, in this vein. I should agree with you. could you say a few words about what you might consider asirrational human behavior? No, I couldn't. I've never tried to set up what might be a pattern forme to measure irrational human behavior. To me, all human behavioris unpredictable, and considering man's frailty theinthe ramshackle universe he functions in, it'sit's all irrational. Itcouldn't be very rational because his universe is not a very rational one, itseems to me. I think that probably no writer would set himself up tojudge. If he'd begun to judge the people he writes about, hisallthewhatever the gods are that lets him do somethingwhich is his cup of tea, he likes, might withdraw the gift. If he beginsto preach oror proselytize oror passjudgment, that the fire might go out. Also, I think the writer isnot really interested inin bettering man's condition. He reallydoesn't care a damn about man's condition. He is interestedin all man's behavior, with no judgment whatever. That it'sit'smotion. It's life. The only alternative is nothingness, death. Andso, to the writer, anything man does is fine because it's motion. If he were notdoing that, he would be nothing. He'd be dead. Maybe the writer has no concept of morality at all, only an integrity to hold always towhat he believes to be the facts and truth of human behavior, not moral standards at all. But that man in his books does what man will do, notwhat man should do, but what he will do, maybe what he can't help but do.Is the writer's motivation then simply just a portrayal of that whichmost people see but perhaps don't take in? Did you say the writer? No, I think that his aim is maybemore specific. He simply wants to make something which wasn't here yesterday.There's not much that he can do. He can take only the oldstruggles of man within the human predicament, and by showing it slightly awryor with some faint new light from an individual perception,make something which was a little different from what was here before. That is,whatwhat the writer ahead of him did. There's nothing new he canwrite about. I think that's maybe the writer's denialofof mortality, of death, that he's going to write on the wall,"Kilroy was here."Theoretically, the psychiatrist also does not make judgments. Heessentially takes man as he is, and life as it is, and tries to understand him.And yetwe think that we would be kidding ourselves if wedonevertheless look at thesethings from our own perspective, and certainly whenwhen the ideacomes in of trying to do anything about it, which the writer doesn't do andwhich we do actually do attempt to do as we attempt to better the situation,you've got to think in terms of bettering it to what aim or what goal, and thoseare essentially the goals that we, ourselves, will hold at theat thepresent time or at any given time. Can a writer really avoid personal judgmentor value systems or ? He can, as long as he is a writer. I think that a writeris a perfect case of split personality, that he is one thing whilehe is a writer, and he is something else while he's aadenizen ofof the world. It may be that that'snotthat he can't be rid of that split, that maybe hehas a hope that what he does may improve man in the sense that it will give toman some instance ofof man's fine record, being fragile and frailandand not his own boss by any manner of means,yet out of that he has managed somehow to endure, to have accomplished afew things which have lasted. Maybe, in that sense, the writer has got to workfor man's betterment, even if he is not deliberately trying to. I think that, ina way, the psychiatrist is doing that too. ThatIimagine a psychiatrist inwith one human being could learn about allhe would need to know about what makes man do what he does, and he would stopthen, and since he will devote his life to it, he must have some thought thatsomehow he will improve, in the end, man's condition.What is your idea of what makes man do what he does? I think that man is trying to do what he does because he wants to, thathe himself does not always know why he wants to, but itit makes himfeel good. It makes his glands function right. People do foolhardy, reckless,dangerous things because it makes the glands flow good, makes them feel good. Ithink that man is not a gambler just to get a lot of money, that hegets some pleasure. His system works good when he is engaged in taking chancefor money or using his skill to gain money. The money is just a symbol of it. Ithink he would be a gambler if he werehad to gamble for matches. Iwould say that man does what he does because he wants to. No, sir, I don't. Only what I have learned about it fromlistening to people that do know. What little of psychology I know, thecharacters I have invented and playing poker have taught me.But Freud I'mI'm not familiarwith.You apparently believe in [human] extra sensoryperception, though, don't you? Yes, I probably depend almost completely on it. I don'thave a trained mind. I've got to depend on extra sensoryperception.Would you tell us something perhaps about your acquaintanceship with someof the people thathave been the prototypes for the characters inyour writing? I'm just wondering how you got to know them so well, tohave been able to pick their thoughts. I think this is related to Dr. Wilson'sidea about the subconscious.That would be through aan unflaggingcuriosity about people, interest in what people are doing, how they do it, andwhat they say. Not with any desire to study people or to store up material towork from, but out of simple curiosity, I reckon. Though itit may bethat no man could be that disinterested in the material he worksfrom. Maybe that any writer's something like a packrat. He gathers up everyscrap he sees on the chance that someday he may need it, and sure enough, thereit is. The characters, I think, are composite of experience, observation andimagination, but nobody could say just how much of which goes into it. I'mconvinced, though, that no writer's going to be satisfied just towriteuse people as he saw them, because he's convinced that he can doa better job of creating credible people than the Lord can. He can alwaysimprove onAnd he's also probably a congenital liar.That's why they call it fiction, I suppose.Heprobably couldn't tell the truth on any subject.Do you actually make notes of people who arouse your curiosity? No, sir. Never did any research, never made any notes. I have a lot offaith in my memory. If I can't remember it, it wasn't worth keeping anyway,probably.  as I understand itcorrect mewhen you said thatyou thought the psychiatrist took a man and was capable of knowing him wellenough or understanding him well enough, he would know about the nature of manmore asas much as that you would otherwise, for example studyingpeople as a group or as a culture? I would assume so. But then I don't know. I'm ignorant. As Isay, I have no training in psychology, psychiatry. I would assume thatpsychiatrists could learn as much about man from one man as a surgeon couldabout man from one cadaver. That's probably wrong, but that's my assumption.How much influence infor example, in your portrayal andcreation of people, how much influence doesdoes a given culture havein determining this person that you make or write about? It'd have a great deal of influence, butbut mostly on thesurface. It would influence his idioms, his surface actions,his manners. But I would say if you went deep enough, he wouldlook a good deal like the same individual of his age and physicalcondition in some African culture.You don't deliberately use symbolism, [do you]? I suspect the writer's too busy to deliberately use anything, even goodgrammar.That he is simply trying to get something down, and hehashe's completely immoral. He will rob and steal from any source hefinds, just like the packrat, against the day when maybe he'll need it. And writingout of a culture, whichwhich has certain symbols, in time he willreproduce those symbols without any deliberation. That's not himself, not hisown erudition. It was simply the culture, which hewhich was theenvironment he grew up in, and maybe something of [its residue]which produced [it]. But I think any writer's too busy dealingwith people, andand people are incredible and in motion. All thewriter can do once the characters come to life is to run at topspeed behind them and try to put down everything they do and say before they getout of sight, out of hearing, that he hasn't got time to usesymbols deliberately.Most of your characters are certainly highlyindividualized human beings. Do you have any particular ideas on theso-called trend toward conformity or loss of individualization in our currentsociety? Yes. I have very definite ideas about that, and if I ever becomea preacher, it will be to preach against man, individual man,relinquishing into groups, any group. I'mI'm against belonging toanything.Of course, whenwhen I wasyoung, I belonged to young people's fraternities and things like that, but now Idon't want to belong to anything except the human race.Why is that? I think that there's too much pressure to make people conform, and Ithink that one man may be first-rate, but if you get one man andtwo second-rate men together then he's not going to be first-rate any longerbecause thethe voice of that majority will be asecond-rate voice. The behavior of that majority will be second-rate. And Ithink that a second-rate man [who stays] himself at least won'tbe third rate. But no second-rate man is going to become first-rate just byjoining one or two more first-rate people.Could you go further and say how you rate people like that, for instancesecond-rate? Well, sir, that would be a little difficult and maybe a little trite. Iwould say that a first-rate man is oneis a man thatdid the best he could with what talents he had to make something which wasn'there yesterday and also tothat never hurt an inferior, never harmedthe weak, practiced honesty and courtesy and tried to be as brave as hewanted to be whether he always was that brave or not. Ithink that a man that held to those tenets wouldn'tget very far if he were involved in a group of people that hadrelinquished their individualities to some one voice which wouldcouldcontrol their behavior. do you feel likethat man is, you might say, bynature, first-rate or second-rateinfluences orcircumstances lead to his being what he is? By nature beingonebeing otherin other words, man, by nature,has to pull himself up orto first-ratebeing a first-rateperson or man, by nature, would be a first-rate person, and some are pulled downto being second-rate people? I would say that he would have to pull himself up to be what I havepremised as a first-rate human being, that the child is not born a first-ratehuman being, in that sense, because the child is still a savage untilitwell, until a little boy is not civilized untilheabout thirteen or fourteen when he falls in love with his teacher.She teaches him to wash his face, behave like a member of the human race. Idon't believe that all people areare born equal, if that's what youmean, that they are allpeople are not born second-rate or tenth-rate,that some people may be incapable of ever becoming first-rate. But that would befrom possiblyyes, it would have to be heredity because environmentcould be changed, and if allif there was only environment that heldpeople second-rate that [could] be changed, but some people areborn incapable of being first-rate.This freedom that you insist on interests me a great deal. It seems to methat that's where much of psychiatry goes astray, is in loss ofoffreedom to think and act and so forth as we would if we were totally free or, asyou say, relinquish our individuality. Aside from joining [things,though], do you findfind that it's a constant path ofmaintaining freedom or is it something that comes natural to you.In other words, are you a natural rebel against convention or conformity? I don't know whether I believe there's such things as natural rebel. Ithink that man's impulsethat man really doesn't want to be free, thathe is willing to relinquish his freedom to anyone that will give him bread andcircuses, that it takes a certain amount of education or precept by someoneolder and wiser to make a young man value freedom enough to strugglefor it. It's very easy for him to submit to the constant pressure from thepeople who have got to sell him something in order to keep an economy of wastein motion like ours. To be free, he's an anachronism. He'sagainsthe's a fly in their ointment. And whether he hadan impulse to be free, that impulse will not be enough in a youngman against all the concerted, organized pressure to make him relinquish freedominto the hands of whoever runs the finance company that collects on hisautomobile oror compels him to be married in order to sellanother dishwashing machine to somebody.How long do you think thatif we know an individual'sexperiencesI mean, which is very difficult to do, but if we just saythat ideally we know all these [experiences] that a personhashad, don't you think that we can predict his behavior? I would think if anybody could predict his behavior, it would be thepsychologist, the psychiatrist.I mean, don't you think that a person, what he does, is based on the wayhe has been [raised], the experiences he has had in the past?Are they [formative] of his conduct, of what he does or what hesays? I wasto an extent, andand also, to an extent, whathe does at the moment ishis environment is responsiblefor it.That he would have impulses whichwhich his heredity may havetaught him to keep down, but his environment may have released him from theprohibition. That if you change his environment, hehe mightwould behavedifferently. It wouldn't alter what he wanted to do, but probably any moralityis simply a system ofofof enabling a man to say "don't" tohimself.With this loss of freedom, conformity, materialism, and so forth, howoptimistic or pessimistic do you feel about our current culture, as we see ittoday? Well, pessimism isI wouldn'tdon't like to acceptthat term because I have a great belief in man. He has survived the dinosaur,and I am convinced he will survive his atom bombs. I am convinced that the lastsound on earth will be two people building an air ship arguing about wherethey're going next.I have a great faith inman.More specifically, in terms of our westso called westernculture? It's an unpleasant one. It's aanuisance to have to live through, but the only alternative is to get out if it,and you can't.It won't last any more than the othercultures. And this one, as soon as we have used up the last of the naturalresources, we will have another one. This iswe are living in aneconomy of waste, to buy a new one next year. We clutter the earth up with theautomobiles and washing machines we turned in in order to buy a new one, andthat may create jobs, and maybe the scientists will invent some way to vaporizeall these things.And that'll be something forGeneral Motors. They could have a gas that would vaporize every car in thestreetand leave us sitting therewithwith the steering wheel in your hand, nothing [behindyou][start all over again]. It's that or finally choke the earthup and build a roof over it.[Start over].You're writing a novel now, I guess.  Well, I just saidsaid that the writer don't ever stop. Peopleask me what time of day I work, and I say, "All the time." Sir, let me ask you to discuss very briefly the character of Monk, inlight of his freedom and inevitability[and so on]? Monk, he was theit'sI don't re-read this, andI'mI'll have to remember just who Monk was. Right nowI[I thought it was] one of the short stories . Oh, yes, the one that went to the penitentiary, was sentto the penitentiary. Well, he was aprobably a moron thatjust wanted to get along, just wanted enough to eat, and probablyliked for people to speak kindly to him. He got involved inin a crimewhich he didn't commit, was sent to the penitentiary, and was used as a tool byan evil man that wanted to get revenge on the warden. He was innocent, andinnocence possibly has no safe place in this world, that you can't be thatinnocent and survive in it, that you've got to have a little of evil in yournature to cope with the world and mankind. do you think that man changes [chiefly through]economic changes, that educational measures, for example, have rather littleimpact ? No, I think that he withstands economic changes prettywell. The only thing that willwill help him, will change him, in myopinion, is education. If we ever do get education in this country. I mean the[schools] that children go to. That thatisthat is the hope.Some of us have been very interested in the psychological aspects ofsegregation. I should be interested to know whether you believe that hope forthat problem lies in education? I think if we improve the schools, integration of schools would solveitself. I think that if the schools were up to the standard of the best thatwent there, only the best could stay and the ones that [wentin] would be so busy working they wouldn't have time to bother aboutwhat color who was sitting next to them. And Imy hope is, that allthis uproar over integration will improve schools to that point. To get rid ofthe emotional problem, the old folks will probably have to die off. The tragedyis that right now white people and colored people simply do not like and trusteach other.What are the greatest defects that you see in our current educationsystem other than this mediocritymass levelingthing? problem, the old folks will probably have to die off. The tragedyis that right now white people and colored people simply do not like and trusteach other.What are the greatest defects that you see in our current educationsystem other than this mediocrity, mass leveling thing [that certainlyapplies] ? The level of the school, of the classes, is at the lowest sothat the one at the foot of the class won't be madeto feel inferior. And I never could understand why he shouldn't be made to feelinferior since he is.[Along with] this business of conforming, this businessof respectability so often comes in. Do you have any particular ideas oropinions on this, particularly in terms of the conflict between being a memberof the human race, yes, but also not getting lost in it in terms ofthe super-respectable, should also to some degree[be a] conforming person? Yes, you've got to do a certain amount of compromising in order to haveroom to be free aswho was it said, "Fear God, sir, and the police."That there's simply not room on the earth, and it'd be pretty lonely to be toofree. And then, also, you probably wouldn't know what freedom was unless you hadsome boundaries to it, that my freedom must stop where the end ofyour nose begins.[One's] got to be conscious of that, too,know what the freedom is that he's trying to preserve and fight for.Do you think, at this time, that economic factors are influencingpolicies about segregation much? Are there largelythe difficultiesare largely the results of prejudicesprejudices based ononother matters, such as the fear of the sexual intermingling? I would say that the quarrel was, in the beginning, economic, that in mycountry anyway, the South, I meanMississippi, where the agrarian economy was based on the necessity for thecheapest sort of labor, that the white man didn't want to lose hisNegro peon, really. He dressed it up in all sorts of emotional conditionsbecause the poor white man, who was in actual economic conflictwith the Negro for the same crop on the same sort of poor land, could respondto that. The white man would see the Negro withwith the same poorland as he, butand with worse tools, with worse stock, yet would seemto be happier, to make a better living for his family. All that white man had tojustify himself was that he was white, so he was better than the Negro, sohethen he wouldn't have to say, "I'm a worse farmer thanhe is." [He'd] say, "That don't matter. I'm better than he isbecause I'm white." I think that had a great deal to do with it in my country.Apart from that notion of mine that, because of our mutual past the white manandand the black man simply don't like each other and can't trusteach other.Which is a conditionI don't know what to do about that. It wouldtake a psychiatrist or psychologist to eradicate that ..Do you think the white man trusts the white man? He will, yes. That's sort of a generalgeneral statement, ageneral answer. He will distrust the white man for any one of a number ofreasons. Hehe may have indigestion or he may have haddealings with another white man that looked like him or had the same name, buthe will distrust the colored man at once because the colored man has black skin.Not because of his trade or profession or his appearance, simplybecause he has a black skin.Don't you think that this is the rationalization of the person in orderto discharge by channeling his hostilities on something? Yes, if you grant that that hostility is aaninability to trust a man of another race because of the color ofhis skin.Well, what I mean is that there is not any basic hostility to a Negro, toa colored man, but the only thing is that we are not able to show thishostility, to come out at people, and we can find somebody on whom we can showthis hostility because he has a different color. I mean, it's something wherepeople can unify and forget their inter-hostilities in between themselves.People on the West Coast of this country distrust Japanesebecause they're Japanese. There are other people that distrust Jewish peoplebecause they're Jewish. But all white people seem, to me, to distrust Negroes.Not white people on the West Coast to distrust Negroes, but all white peopleseem to distrust Negroes, that they do not like Negroes.It'sthere's near asas I can see without any geographicalreason, as the Californian has for not liking Japanese.Do you think this is true of European white person too? It seems to be, that they got along withwith Negroes verywell until suddenly a lot of Negroes began to appear inin Europeancountries. I have known Italians and French and Germans. Of course, in theGerman could have been something of Nazism that still hung on. Butanyamong allany white people where there have been enoughNegroes to where the Negro was not a novelty and a curiosity, Icouldthink that I could feel that distrust and that dislike.Do you have any idea how this started in the beginning ?Do you think it's the influence of our culture? I would say, yes, because I don't know people too well of othercultures, if you mean by our culture what we call the Christian culture. I don'tknow how Russians, Siberians, might feel toward Negroes, if it would beinstinctive with them, too. I don't know that. I would think thatsome of it would be because of our culture, yes'm. Certainly that's trueinin my part of the South where part of our culture has been thatagrarian economy in which the Negro was inferior because it was necessary thathe be either a slave or a peon. It seems to me that in this country, once theNegro was freed of thatthehis condition in that agrarianeconomy, then the culture, his culture, and the white man's culture don't touchanymore except in the installment plan, automobiles and juke boxes, things likethat.Do you feel that this innatewhatever type of dislike forcolored people [by] white people, is going to cause a terrific,long lasting struggle,in the South, if the Supreme Courtdecision is forced on the South in regard to pressure for[ending] segregation? It would be a long time. I think that that Supreme Court decision hascaused a great deal ofof trouble. It has set back a gradual changeofof the Negroes' condition for the better in the South, but it hasnot changed it in the long run. In the long run, it was bound to come. TheSupreme Court had to make that decision. I would say that within five hundredyears the Negro race in this country will have disappeared. Itwill be fifty years before Negroes are permitted in white schools inMississippi, I would guess, [though]. That would be the last ofthe states. And that may be because Mississippi is last inliteracy, or they may go hand-in-hand, anyway.How much effect do you think the exodus of the Negro[willhave] on the situation down ? It's changed a lot, but that's a question like, which was first, thechicken or the egg? We still don't know whether the invention of machines thatwill do the work which mules and human hands had to do once has caused theNegro to move or whether the Negro leaving the South has brought in themachinery. But ifthere's been a definite change. In my county, in thelast twelve months, there were thirty six hundred Negroes left for the North.Out of that there will beusually, ten percent will stay for a year ortwo and then come back. But they arethe Negro is leavingMississippi, going to the big cities. Itit may be thathis young people were drafted. They saw something of the city andjust liked urban life and areare going to the big town. Because therewere fifteen hundred white people left Lafayette County, too. And they were theex-soldier that had seen something of the world, of city life, and didn't wantto spend the rest of their lives looking at empty fields, feeding mules, andrunning tractors to raise cotton. you're not entirely dispassionate about this problem areyou? I mean you show concern as a person about what you might call socialproblems. As a writer would you be able to divorce yourself entirely frompassionate feelings? Ihope that I'm not dispassionate about it, but Ithink that a writer had better save all his passion to making credible the humanbeings which he creates from the observation, the experience, and theimagination, to set into dramatic instances of man's struggle in the condition,to have any left to preach to anyone about segregation or about tolerance oranyanything else. If he does that, he had better stop trying to be afiction writer andand be an essayist or a propagandist.I'm quite sure thatthat you can't keep outofof your work your own opinions andand convictions aboutthings, but I think the writer has no business dragging in his opinions. He'dbetter stick to dealing with man in his dilemma, in his predicament, hisstruggles with the human heart, the old verities that he hasalways had to struggle with, which have outlastedthe changes in culture, economics.But now what weabout something depends on how wehave had our experience. I mean, I can see to the same thing, you will seedifferent things [and everyone else is] going to see differentthings. Anything that we use, our imagination, our observation, is just based onour previous experience. Surely. Itit won't chasechange the basic fact welook at. I mean by the verities the peoplethatthe facts that youngpeople fall in love and want to sleep together, that man wants certain things,and he knows if he gets it, the police may get him. He knows thatthe weak shouldshould be protected by the strong, that he should havecombe capable of compassion, of pity, of courage, of honor. I grantyou that everyone, in looking at these instances, will see themfrom a slightly different point of view, with a slightly different illuminationon it, but it's basically the same truths which he looks at.Don't you think that these are the basic experiences that the culturegives to us? I mean, to a certain extent we have all the same ideas, to acertain extent, because the culture [has incultured them] tous? If you go to another culture, they won't do the same. They won't feel thesame, maybe. The basic areas are going to change, to a certain extent. Well, they are ephemeral changes, unless we mean different things byculture. To me, a part ofof our American culture is the pressure ofeverybody to throw his old car away every year and buy a new one. It's thepressure ofnot to read, but to listen to the television, to theradio. That is what I mean by our culture. I don't mean that thetradition ofofof wisdom that we could getfromfrom solitude or fromfrom reading books.[Because] if we mean different things by culture then weare at slightly cross purposes.Mr. Faulkner Do you think we get certain things from reading books? And I'm sure thereare certain ways to communicate feelings about things, and I have a feeling,from your books, that you are trying to communicate certain very strong feelingsthat you have about things. Now youyou don't do them in an obvious,sermonizing way, but I do think that your books,[that come tomemory] are, to a certain extent, books which propound certainsystems of values. And I don't mean, again, to sound like thatby that[standing on a soap box], but, for instance, the oneonon segregation,[Intruder in theDust],I think youyou do more than just[sermons]. I think you make certain points about people and[their] values. Yes'm. I agree with you, but they areare coincidental. Thewriter is too busy writing about people struggling with their own hearts, withothers, or with environment, that his own convictions and opinions aboutinjustices come out, but he's not, at that moment, concerned in telling thereader, "This is what I think about injustice or morality." He's simply tryingto take from his experience and imagination and observation peopleand make them stand up and assume enough of reality to, you might say, cast ashadow behind them and themselves move, engage in thein the struggleswhich have been man's nature ever since he became man, forfor love,forfor pleasure, for money, to be brave, to be honest, as much as hecan. maybe this sounds like a stupid question, but why does thewriter write? Is it just to depict people in action or what they're doing? Whywould you be motivated to write if you don't particularly have a point to proveor a sermon to preach? Is it just to put down what you observe and [seehow it works out or]? Could you comment on that? Yes. First, you are demon driven. You can't help it. Also, it's fun.It's the one occupation you have found which is fun because you're never boredby it, because you can't do it. There's no such thing as satiety. You never canwrite the book which you want to write. It will never quite match that dream, soyou always have something to get up tomorrow to do. In the last analysis, as Isaid a while ago, you know that you're here for a specific time, which iscomparatively very short, that someday you'll pass through the wall into whatyou don't know, and you will have left on that wall simply, "Kilroy was here."It's not especially forfor glory nor fame, but to just leave ascratch on it. It's that it was me that made that scratch. It wasn't anybodyelse but me. Just old Bill Shakespeare or whatever his name is. [Do you have] any idea where this demon comes from orwhy some people seem to have it? Others wish they have it or try to convincethemselves they do and others don't. Well it may be that it's from providence ororthe boss of whoever runs things that feels it's necessary to keepa record ofof frail, fragile man's struggle with his dilemma thatnever has licked him and probably never will. Maybe it's necessary that recordbe kept, and the painter, the musician, the people that delve into man'smechanisms to find what makes him do and leave a record of it, are all leaving arecord of man's successful struggle, not hisnot that he prevailedover his dilemma, but that at least he endured it. And, in a sense, he hasprevailed because he continues to reproduce and will still endure it, and as Isaid, the last sound in the dying world will be two folks going somewhere.How old were you when you first were aware of the possession by this devilthat you must write? Oh, when I got slowed down. As long as I was writing, as I was[hot,] I never had time to think about it. It was fun. Butwhen I got long in years and found that it was a chore. It waswork to write, and I'd say, "Well, I've done a few books now, so I think I'llquit." I found out that I wasn't going to quit and that I never would quit. Andthen I decided that it was[evidently] it was ademon.That it certainly wasn't me, and it certainly wasn't any inclination ofmine to keep [going.] I just couldn't quit. It was less troubleto go on and write than to fight the demon off. How old were you when you first started to write, to as acareer, as a way of life, to? Were you in a teens? I had always been scribbling, as soon as I learned to spell.Ifrom what my mother tells me, I was inventing fantastical romancesmainly to get out of having to do chores at home before that. But I never becamea serious writer until aroundI was around twenty-two, three yearsold.  [Okay, back to] What do you think will happen to the artisan that you justnamed a few minutes ago, when our schools become all scientific, when we copythe Russians [for our education]? Oh, hehe willhiswith the help of hisdemon, he will withstand that too. Hehe won't go to school if he canhelp it, but if he's compelled to go to school that won't bother him. Becauseeven a totalitarian government ain't going to make him go to school longer thaneight hours a day. That still leaves him sixteen hours to sleep and eat and readDostoyevsky in. He'll find plenty of time. That won't stop him. Becausehe'sas I said, he's doing something that's fun. In my opinion, it'sthe most fun of any occupation a man could have, is to take theold shopworn material and try to make something just a little new out of it,with it. Something that wasn't quite here yesterday. Never to do it. Always tospring out of bed the next morning, rubbing your hands, eager to go back to workat it because this time it'll come off. You know it won't,but it may.It sounds very much like psychotherapy.  It probably is [pretty good psychotherapy].[Could you discuss] your feeling about geniusandand the artist and maybemaybe inrelativein relationship to madness? What is a genius? Well, I think that he is a madman, but he'sdriven by his demon so that he hasn't got time to be a public nuisance with it, that he has ahas an escape forit, that he concentrate on his piece of marble with his hammer and his chisel orhis canvas or his ream of typewriter paper, and he can discharge itsofor the rest of the time he is socially immobilized, and nobodypays any attention to him, that he's very likely insane, too.A lot of our patients are either writers or want to be or artists in oneway or another. [And are coming] really pretty closesometimes to being good. [It often puzzles me as to] why, or what is thedifference, as far as some don't quite gel and others do? Probably that's why they become your patients. Theytheycouldn't quite gel and couldn't bear it, that others couldn't quite gel, andtheytheir frustration is channeled into some harmless condition.Or is it, sir, the tension that some have been [inis] so big that they are completely disorganized in theiractivities, and others who have been under pressure and have some good parts inthemselves, and then they reproduce that and can develop these ideas in order togive them more security in their work or in their capacity. I meantheyI do believe that genius don't grow in a family where the[equilibrium is very good]. I mean theythey areunder pressure themselves, and they feel unhappy. They feel bad, and they haveto develop certain things that are going to make them feel more comfortable,have some fun, and get something out of their lives. I have seen a lot of peoplethat havewere very brilliant, but they were in a class, for example,where they had not to spend too much time, and they have been becoming lazy, andthey didn't work, because they were able to doto produce very easily,and when there was something that had to be done with difficulty, they neverproduce anymore. But I have seen people that have been under pressure, andtheythey spend a lot of time, and theythey are a realgenius. I have seen people that were under pressure, in very difficultsituations, that have become genius, and people that have had a very easy lifenever have produced anything. I can't say. Of course, you would know morebetter than Ibecause you would have had a wider range of observation than I. I would makeaone simple, more or less hard and fast rule. If you have a firstrate demon, then he's going to take care of everything else for you. Does that mean that you place little emphasis on craftand such things as revision and Oh, sure. There's always somebody will correct the grammar andpunctuate it for you.You don't need to worry about style. Get itdown on paper is all you need to do.[I think all theI think]What Doctor[Neigrims] was saying, he feels stress and unfortunatesituations are necessary for genius. Do you think that's so? No, sir, I don't think so, but then Doctor [Neigrims] hada wider range to observe than me, that he's interested inin people aspeople. I'm interested in people as material, you might say, that I reallydon'tdon't give a damn about thatDid you have a very hard and unfortunate life? No, sir. As far as I know, I had a good life. I hadhad a verypleasant one.You don't think your reactions are inin response tostress? No, sir. I think that the demon lit on my shouldersI don't know where he came from or why he pickedon me. That's the only explanation I have. Itit may bethat I took up writing as awhat do youcall ita protest to beingagainst being small andinsignificant, that I wanted to be big and brave and handsome and rich. It couldbe that. I don't know. What was the [actions] of your family all along? Well, my father thought that the oldest son ought to go to work and beready to take over the family when his time came, and I wanted to be a tramp,and we never did see eye to eye on that, but I got along all right with it. Well, thank you all.We enjoyed it [tremendously]. I think I'll take the moderator's [privilege and ask thefirst question,] if I may. I'd like to know a little bit about thecircumstances of the composition of "The Bear." Can you remember when it wasthat you first thought of it and put it down ? I couldn'tcouldn't say. That story is probably a summationofof my whole experience from the first time I was big enough to gointo the woods where bears were with a gun until I became a man.Probablythat story may be autobiographical, in the sense that it wasthat little boy's confrontation with something big and important, for he himselfto find how he would meet it, toas Hemingway says, "to meet it withgrace." What I mean is, probably I was composing that story from the firstmoment I went into thewhat we call the big woods andand realizedwhat it was. There would be bigger animals, wilder animals than the rabbits andpossums and things that I had experience with when I was not big enough yet tocarry a gun into the woods.You really began composing it when you were Isac's age? I think so, yes, or remembered it, and then when I had acquired someskill in the craft of writing, to write my own biography against somethingwhich was a fine pleasure to me, a worthwhile pursuit, which isprobably a part of any boy's life, any American boy, unless he haswasbred and lived all his life in the city. I imagine there are not many of you herewho haven't hunted. When you first have a gun, rabbits, possums, and then yougot big enough to hunt bigger game than that.[Have you] written anything else about Boon Hogganbeck,after "The Bear"? He is one of my stable of people that I consider myself the owner andproprietor of. I think I have used himoccasionally at need. I don't recall now specifically what stories or books, butI believe I have used him. But he hasn't been the central characterin a story, like he was there, or one of the centralcharacters.  since you put such meaning into the hunt, could you tell usjust why you hunted when you were a young boy oror what meaning thehunt has to you? The hunt was simply a symbol of pursuit. Mostofof anyone's life is a pursuit of something. That is, the onlyalternative to life is immobility, which is death. This was asymbolization of the pursuit which is a normal part ofof anyone'slife while he stays alive, told in terms which were familiar to meandand dramatic to me. The protagonist could have been anything elsebeside that bear. I simply told a story which was a natural, normalpart of anyone's life in a familiar and, to me, interesting terms, without anydeliberate intent to put symbolism in it. I was simply telling something whichwas, in this case, the child, the need, the compulsion of thechild to adjust to the adult world. It's how he does it, how he survives it,whether he is destroyed by trying to adjust to the adult world or whether,despite his small size, he does adjust within his capacity. And always to learnsomething, to learn something ofnot only to pursue butto overtake and then to have the compassion not todestroy. Toto catch, to touch, and then let gobecause then tomorrow you can pursue again. If you destroy what you caught, thenit's gone. It's finished. And that, to me, is sometimes the greaterpart of valor, but always it's the greater part of pleasure, not to destroy whatyou have pursued. The pursuit is theis the thing, not the reward, notthe gain. Yes ma'am.Sir, you explained to us that Ikethe storyof Ike in "The Bear" is, in a manner of speaking,autobiographical. Does Ike's theory of a curse on the land in any wayreflect your feeling of a curse on the land? Nowell, if itif it should, it wouldnot be, maybe, as strong as Ike's. I think that any authorshouldshould put on thea full page in his book that he isnot responsible for the ideas expressed by any of his characters, their ideas orpolitical convictions oror religious beliefs.I think that Ike probably carriedthat a little further thanthan I might have because it was necessaryfor my story that he should.That he was ahe was a poet, in his way,an idealist, which I probably am not or, anyway, not as good a one asIke.  a central theme ofAbsalom, Absalom! is that Sutpen will not or cannot acknowledge Charles Bon ashis son. Why does he not do this, whywhywhy does he leaveit to Henry? Itit seemed to me it would have been more in keepingwith Sutpen's character [to][confession of it to Bon or if he had even destroyed Bon so that he]  Well, he didn't acknowledge Bon for the reason that Bonwas part Negro. To have acknowledged Bon as his son would have destroyed thevery dream, the drive, which had compelled him to go through hardshipandand suffering to begin with. He couldn't acknowledge Bon as hisson.Did he acknowledge Clytemnestra as his daughter? No. Well, that would not have mattered because Clytemnestra was afemale. The important thing to him was he should establish a line of dukes, yousee. He was going to create a dukedom. He'd have to have a male descendent. Hewould have to establish a dukedom, which would be his revenge on the whiteVirginian who told him to go to the back door. And soheheto have a Negrohalf-Negro for his sonwould have wrecked the whole dream, so he couldn't. If he had thoughtthat it would ever be exposed that Bon was his son, he may havekilled Bon himself. If it'd ever come to that point, he would destroy Bon, justas he would destroy any other individual that got in his way.Sir, you said that you, as the author, are not responsible for what yourcharacter is saying. How about the language that they use? I noticed that someof the dialogue in "The Bear" was a little bit above [the level of] the averagesoutherner, speaking as someone who has. Didyou mean that to be realistic or is that just [poetic license]? I think that's a license that the writer should be permitted. Heis trying to take an instant in man's struggle withinthe human dilemma and isolate it in some dramatic form, and hehasn't got the time to do it that living peoplewouldwould have. They would have days and weeks to tell this story,but he has got to tell it in thirty minutes or two or three hours or, at most,two days. He has got to emphasize, over-emphasize at times. He's got tounder-emphasize at others.So that is histhe privilege of his craftto put a sort of poetry into the mouths of people that in real life would be incapable of speaking poetry. He sticks just enough to the naturaland to dialect to make what they say believable, eventhough you say, "Well, he couldn't have expressed this idea in this way." Yousay, "Well, anyway, he would have expressed it in [this]language." That's one of the privileges that you must give thewriter, that he is sticking to the fundamental truth, but he can distort factjust a little ifin order to get his story told in amoving, dramatic way. Sir, how did you happen to choose Old Ben ? He was the biggest untamed creature in the woods at thattime. Thethe otherthe Indian was gone,thethe buffalo, the other big, wildcreatures had been eliminated by that time. Only the bear remained. He was thebiggest wild thing to be a protagonist in the story of this littleboy's adjustment to the adult world.Thenso I think that maybe Old Ben was anon-fictional character then? No, there's no writer ever will be satisfied to take any character fromreal life, put him in the book, because he's convinced he can do a much betterat that than God can. He's going to improve and warp and distort no matter howmuch he concentrates on trying to tellstick to facts. A writer simplycouldn't stick to facts. The truth really is not in him. That's why they call itfiction.  Yes ma'am.I'd like to go back to Charles Bon in Absalom,Absalom! I have the impression that [up until] verynear the end of the book that he did not realize that he was Sutpen's son. Because he's several timesmentioned wondering what the secret was that his motherkept and worried about. And yet about twenty orthirty pages from the end of the book he says to Henry that "It's themiscegenation and not the incest that [you fear] in my marriage to Judith."So at what pointdiddid he find this out and how did he find out? I think that Bon knew all the time that his mother waspart Negress, but during Bon's childhood that was not important. He grew upinin the Indies and New Orleans where that wasn't too important. Hismother was a wealthy woman. She could have called herself a Creole, whether shehad Negro blood along with the French or not. It became important only when Bonrealized that it was important to his father. I think that Bon got into thatbusinesswell, of course, because he formed a friendship with Henryand felt that hethat Henry, the ignorant country boyhad given him a sort of worship, an admiration and a worship,whichwhich he enjoyed. Then when he saw the sort of stiff-necked manthat Henry's father was and knew that that was his father too, he, in a way, hadgiven his father a chance to say, "I will acknowledge you, but ifyouif I do [openly and you stay here],you will wreck what I have devoted my life to andso take my love and go," I think Bon would have done, but this old man wasafraid to do that. And Bon tempted him, to hold him over the coals inpartlyin revenge on his treatment of hisBon's mother,until Bon got involved too deeply. No, Bon knew that he was a Negro, but untilhe found it was important to Sutpen, that wasn't important to him, that he wasa gentleman, had been well bred, cultured, much better bred andcultured than Henry himself was. Did Bon love Judith [or was he just using her] ? I think he loved her. I think that he loved her. He knewthat if she knew that he was part Negro, with her training andbackground, it would have destroyed her too. Returning to "The Bear,"why did youput Part Five after Part Four? That story was part of a novel. It wasthepursuit of the bear was simply, what you might call, aadangling clause in the description of that man when he was a young boy. When itwas taken from the book and printed as a short story, the publisher, who is veryconsiderate, has a great respect forfor all work and for mine inparticular, he would not have altered one word of that without asking me. And hedidn't ask me. If he hadhad told me he was going to print itseparately, I would have said, "Take this out. This doesn't belong in this [as] a short story. It's part of the novel, but not a part of the story." Butrather than to go ahead and do that without asking meIwasn't available at that timehe printed it as it was. Ititdoesn't belong in there [as] a short story. The way to readthat is to skip that when you come to it. Mr. Faulkner In Absalom, Absalom! is any one of the people whotalks about Sutpen have the right view, or is it more or less a case of thirteenways of looking at a blackbird with none of them [getting it]right? That's it exactly. I think that no one individualcancan look at truth. Ititit blinds you. Youlook at it, andand youyou see one phase of it. Someoneelse looks at it and sees a slightly awry phase of it, but taken all together,the truth is in what they saw, though nobody saw the truth intact.Soso these areare true as far asas Miss Rosaand as Quentin saw it. Quentin's father saw whatwhat he believed wastruth. That was all he saw. But the old man was himself a littletoo big forfor people no greater in stature than Quentin and MissRosa and Mr. Compson to see all at once. It would've taken, probably, a wiser ormore tolerant or more sensitive or more thoughtful person to see him as he was.It was, as you say, thirteen ways looking at a blackbird. But the truth, I wouldlike to think, comes out, that when the reader has read all these thirteendifferent ways of looking at the blackbird, the reader has his own fourteenthimage of that blackbird, which I would like to think is the true one.Mr. Faulkner Mr. Coldfield, in Absalom, Absalom!, retreats intothe attic when the war between the states starts. Now, why did he do that? Wasit because he was sort of a conscientious objector, or was he all or partcoward? No, hehe was probably by religious scruples a conscientiousobjector. Also, he was very likely a Unionist, that he hated that threat to thedissolution of the Union.That he hadn't enough courage to do anything about itexcept to hide his head in the sand. But I think that he wasprobably a Unionist. He probably came fromfrom eastern Tennessee,where the people were Unionists at that time. His background was atradition ofof fidelity to the United States, as it was. He had noagrarian tradition behind him in which slavery was an importantpart of it.Mr. Faulkner Was Mr. Coldfield an honest man or was he ? He was probably honest in a timorous sort of way. He was aman probably without a great deal of courage. He was honest simply becausethat wasn't very risky. That he was cold, and I imagine, selfish,butbut in his dealings behind the counter of his store,he was probably honest because that was less trouble and less risk. He was notrapacious. He had no driving desire to amass a lot of money.  why does Major de Spain stop the railroad when the bear isthe small bear is [stuck in] the tree? The bear would have stayed up the tree and starved until the trainstopped running and it got quiet. Then he would come down again. But he wouldstay up the tree, and then when he decided things were quiet and would startdown, another train would pass. He would go back up the tree and stay thereuntil he starved. That was the reason.Sir Are there any real life Sam Fathers left? Well, in the sense that too much time has passed, there could be nobodyhalf Negro slave and half an Indian chief. He might be one-eighth an Indianchief by now, but he couldn't have been the son of an Indian chief and a Negroslave anymore. And so he would be changed, warped, softened a little bya differenta tamer environment than Sam Fathers grew upin. In the creation of "The Bear," were you in any way influenced byMelville? A writer, I have said several times this year and last year too, isinfluenced by everything he ever reads. Hehe himself doesn't bother.He knowshe doesn't think it important enough to say, "I wasinfluenced at this moment by so and so." He is omnivorous, voracious, andcompletely amoral. He is influenced by everything he ever reads. He will rob andsteal, right and left, with complete impunity, because he's not only perfectlywilling, but he's flattered when people after him rob and steal from him, thatif it's good enough for another writer to steal from him, it must have beenpretty good.So, if anything, he's flattered.I'm sure I was influenced by Melville, influenced by Flaubert, by the OldTestament, by everything that I ever read in the days when I read voraciouslywith no judgment. How did you happen to start using this particular means of communication,your style? [How did you hit on this] ? That just happened so. Imy opinion is that the book createsits own style. The writer is too busy to bother with style. He's too busy tobother with grammar, even, or standard punctuation. Get it down, and somebody in thepublishing office will correct it for you.Themain thing is to get it down, and the exigencies of the story, the people in it, compel and create the style. That if you beginto write style then that implies that you ain't got very much to put in it, andso you begin to write prose and rhetoric, which is all right and pleasant enough,but it's hardly worth anybody's trouble to read.   in Sartoris, did you makeSimon, the Negro house man, a tricky or comic character, or did somethingcorrupt him to make him ? That was just what the white folks saw in him because his training,his environment, had taught him that that's what the white folkslook to see in Negroes, and Negroes got along better if they act likeblack-faced comedians when white people were looking at them. That's one of theNegro's tragedies. No, that was just Simon's Sunday suit, you mightsay.  in "The Bear," who is your favorite character? Well, I nevernever thought about that.I probably haven't one. I like all of them.II admire the fyce dog very much.But I hadI never thought which one wasmy favorite character.Mr. Faulkner [Getting back to] your style, do you find that [at first in]your writing that you manipulated [a good many things] and thenit became easier and easier andand probably no longer seems to worryabout such things as revising, [and send it directly to the publishing house]? No, it never has got any easier. If anything it's harder.But do you manipulate and change words ? Sometimes until it comes right. Sometimes I don't have to. I never haveto change a word. Sometimes I work the thing six and seven and eight and nineyears. But I never know. That's part of the charm of writing to me, isthe absolute uncertainty of it.Yes, but at any rate it's not just a spontaneous thing, now ? Well, sometimes it is, yes. not always. Not always.Mr. Faulkner You said [that] in Absalom, Absalom! there were thirteen ways of looking at it. What isyour way? How do you feel about Thomas Sutpen? That the truth about Thomas Sutpen came out of all the thirteendifferent people that looked at him.I mean I mean, like you said about Caddy, you said that Caddywas the darling of your heart.[Is he the darling of your heart]? Well, I said only that I worked hardest and anguished and suffered more overthat book, over The Sound and the Fury.ItI feel toward that asas the parent doestoward the afflicted child, maybe.That I worked the longest andthe hardest over it, and it still is not as good as it should be.Sodid Iso isAbsalom, Absalom! not as good as it should be, but then Ididn't have to anguish over that as much. I could bring myself to the point ofsaying, "I've done the best I can with it and write something else now. Let italone." It took a long time with The Sound and the Furyfor that. To me he's consistent, that he approached the Sutpen familywithwith the same ophthalmia that he approached his own troubles,that he probably never saw anything very clearly, that his was just one of thethirteen ways to look at Sutpen, and his may have been theone of themost erroneous. Probably his friend, McCannon, had a much clearer picture ofSutpen from what Quentin told him than Quentin himself would. No, it'sit's Sutpen's story. But then every time anycharacter gets into aa book, no matter how minor, he isactually telling his biography. That's all anyone ever does: he tells his own biography, talking about himself. In a thousand different[terms], but himself. Quentin was still trying toget God to tell him why. In Absalom, Absalom!maybe he was in The Sound and theFury. Sir, I'd like some help on understanding thewhat I call thebedroom scene in the fourth section of "The Bear." You made one statement, "Sheis lost. She was born lost." Can you help me to understand what you meant bythat? Who does that refer to?That refers to Ike McCaslin's wife. Inin that section Yes, I think I remember now. Shefrom herbackground, her tradition, sex was something evil, that it had tobe justified by acquiring property. She was, ethically, a prostitute. Sexuallyshe was frigid. I think what he meanthe knew thatthere was no warmth that he would ever find from her, no understanding,nono chance ever to accept love or return love becauseshe was incapable of it. That's probably what he meant.And I wondered why she laughed ? he would ever find from her, no understanding, nonochance ever to accept love or return love because she was incapableof it. That's probably what he meant.And I wondered why she laughed and laughed when? She realized then that he was going to give up the land. She married himbecause she was going to be chatelaine of a plantation. And then she found he wasgoing to give all that away, and the only revenge she knew was to nottodeny him sexually, that was the only triumph she had. And she was going to makehim suffer for that just as much as she could to get even with him.So that she intended from the beginning of her marriage to deny him this onething that he had requested until it was useful in blackmailing ? Well, she assumed when they got married that she was going to bechatelaine of a plantation, and they would have children. And she was going tobe asaccording to the rules of the booka good wife to him.She'd still be frigid and cold and a shrew probably, but she'd be a good wife.Then when he was going to throw the plantation away for idealistic folly, allshethe only revenge she had was that. At least he would have nochildren from her. He'd have no wife from her. And she hopedWell, Ike[excuse me, sir]. And she hoped that he wouldwould make him grieve.Well Ike says hereDid she realize when he was saying this that he did not mean it? Did not mean what? that he would go back to the land. She must have understood he was not going to [retract and] takehis heritage. Yes, I'm sure she was convinced of that, no matter what he mighthave said.  if she had been the kind of wife he needed and been able togive him love and companionship and had stuck by him and had children and had ahome for him, do you think that histhat he would have evercompromised with his ideals? After all, he had no training, no way of providingfor her. I would say, since we are supposing, if she had been that sort of woman,she would have understood his hatred of that condition. She mighthave been practical enough to say, "This is the way we'll do it. We can'tabandon these people. But let's do it this way." And he would have said, "You'rewiser than I. Let's try it your way." That's possible. I would like to thinkthat. But he would have stuck to his position that "I will notprofit from this which is wrong and sinful." Sir, one of the most interesting aspects of "The Bear," to me, is theconflict between man and the wilderness. I would like to ask you if you intend forthe reader to sympathize more with Old Ben and his conflict with hunters or withthe hunters and their conflict with Old Ben? Well, not sympathize. I doubt if the writer is asking anyone to sympathize, to choose sides. Thatis the reader's right. What the writer is asking is compassion, understandingthat change must alter, must happen, and change is going to alterwhat was. That no matter how fine anything seems, it can't endure becauseitonce it stopsabandons motion, it is dead. It's to havecompassion for thefor the anguish that the wildernessitself may have felt by being ruthlessly destroyed by axes, byby menwho simply wanted to make that earth grow somethingthey could sell for a profit, which brought into it acondition based on an evil like human bondage. It's not to choosesides at all, just to compassionate thethe good,splendid things which change must destroy, the splendid, fine things which are apart of man's past, too, part of man's heritage, too. But they were obsolete andhad to go. But that's no need to not feel compassion forthem, simply because they were obsolete. is that what you meant by the ending of this, then, thatchange must destroy all goodness? Change, if it is not controlled by wise people, destroys sometimes morethan itit brings. Thatunless somewise person comes along inin thein the middle of thechange and takes charge of it, change can destroy what is irreplaceable. If thereason for the change is base in motive. That is, toclear the wilderness just to make cotton land, to raise cotton on aonan agrarian economy ofof peonage, slavery, is basebecause it's not as good as that wilderness which it replaced. But if in the endthat makes more education for more people and more food for more people, more ofthe good things of lifeI mean by that to give manleisure to use what's up here, instead of just leisure to ridearound in automobiles, then theit was worth destroying thewilderness. But if allif all the destruction of the wilderness doesis to give more people more automobiles just to ride around in, then thewilderness was better. [] in "The Bear," does Boon Hogganbeck havesome particular trait or characteristic that made him the choice ofof person to kill the bear rather than Sam Fathers orIke or some of the older hunters? Well, yes, Boon had his size, his physical size and strength. He had thementality of a child, and he wouldn't stop to think, "This may be a littledangerous to run in there." He had the capacity tolove that dog, enough to risk being mauled to save that dog's life.That Boon with his unreliability, his lack ofof intellect, hadGod-like attributes if he ever met the opportunity to show [them]. And he met,probably, his great moment in life, when he could use his strengthandand his capacity to bebe brave, to save,to protect the weak from the strong, even though the weak was just a dog. Also,Boon was a descendant of the same Indian clan that Sam Fathers was descendedfrom. Sam Fathers, whether Boon knew it or not, was descended from the chief. Hewas Boon's superior in the [woods] because he had better blood.Boon wasBoon's Chickasaw ancestor was probably just a[hunter]. Sam's, even though his mother was a Negro, hisfather was a chief, a king.maybe Boon was doing what he knew Sam expectedhim to do. If I understood you correctly, earlier you said that you did not use anyintentional symbolism in "The Bear." But yet, towards the end of thestorywell, after the end, Ike appears from now on he's goingto lead a very Christ-like existence, and he becomes a carpenter,and was that not intentional? Well, not deliberately intentional. I mean this, thesymbolism, is literary. It's a part ofof anyone's past,background. So these symbols will appear, just as the way youyoupronounce your words appear. You don't know where you learned to pronounce wordsthe way you do because youyou inherited that or it came from yourearly environment, and these symbols, which are Christian symbols, are a part ofthe Christian background which all of us in this country camefrom. That's why I think critics read into books what the writer didn't know wasthere, because he reads from the same background of Christian symbolism whichthe writer unconsciously wrote from. And I'm sure that thesesymbols are all there, but the writer himself don't know it till somebody pointsthem out to him. Because he is too busy simply telling about people to have tohunt around to use symbols to tell about people with. The symbolsinsert themselves just as the proper word does. Because that is a part of hisculture, part of his literary background. What is the function of Boon's breakdown ? No function. He hadhad gone beyond even his strength, thestrain. He hadheat the last, he killed Sam Fathers by SamFather's command, just as a King would say to one of his faithfulbody servants, when he has lost the war and lost the battle, "Don't let my headfall into the enemy's hands." Boon had simply exceeded his own emotional andphysical strength. He just [stayed awake] too long. What significance do [you attach to the dog Lion][left out of the story?Why wasn't the bearkilled] ? Well, that's sort of like saying, "How would Shakespeare have got alongwithout his gravediggers." That is, it's more than atmosphere. It's necessarytoto create the full complete atmospheric picture inwhich man faces the natural, normal dilemmas ofof hiscondition. That Lion was simply necessary, just like the bear was necessary.There was no intent that they should symbolize anything. They were justnecessary components to a moving, dramatic story which approached a climax.He was just needed? Yes, yes. Just like the boy was needed as a protagonist on one side,just as the bear was needed, just as the wilderness was needed,asthey're props to tell the story, whichwasa boy to face the adult world and to see how he copes with it.Because he was a part of the wilderness ? Well, the wilderness where the bear ran had not been tamed yet. Men wentinto it, but they didn't live there. They went in to match their strengthagainst the wilderness, which was older and stronger than they were, yes. Theedges of it would be [gnawed up], butbut where the bear ran was not tamedyet. But when they went in to that bear country, they had to acceptthe bear's conditions, not theirs anymore. The only advantage they had wereguns. And the boy, whohe met thethe symbolof the wilderness, had a chance to use his gun. He didn't use it. He was testinghimself. [extreme end of "The Bear"][where Boon is atthe base of the tree]gun to shoot the squirrels he has up thetree.Is that showing that Boon is unable to cope with moderninstruments like the gun? The only way he could kill something was [bythe way he killed the bear]?[ gun and] not being able to hitanything when he uses it? No, that, to me, was a promise of optimism, a belief of minethat man, no matter how frail he is, is tougher than anything,that he can stand anything, that Boon, having served his purpose inthisthe old bear's saga and Sam Father's finish, was still going on,he was still Boon. If he were needed again by another Old Ben, another SamFathers, he would have served again. That he wasthat, to me, isa sign ofof optimism, that man is pretty good after all,that even his moments of heroism don't necessarily need todestroy. [of man's dilemma] [now, would the terms of this dilemma, inour current society] ? His struggle is, "Shall I do what I can to get rid of whatI know of evil? Or shall I say, 'Well, that's none of my business, and I'll letit alone?' If what I know to be evil, injustice, worries me so, I must dosomething about it. Or how can I, as frail as I am and as solitary as I am,against a vast weight of public opinion who wants to let this alone?" That's hisstruggle and his dilemma and his dramatic moment, in terms ofof[story is]when he faces this problem, this battle,does he lick it or does it lick him? Ifif it beats his brains out,does he still look good while he is having his head battered?Or does he turn tail and run from it? They arethey are his problems.Will I be as brave as I want to be? Will I be as honest as I want to be? Yes, that's right. Yes, he wants to do something about it.  [it seems like] in the ending of "The Bear" [when he breaks down] and starts yelling, "Get away!Get away! Don't touch a one of them!They're mine!They're mine!" Instead of taking that as a sort of an optimistic intention, I thought ofthought of it more so as a warningto man that he can not in the end conquer nature, that in the end naturewill win out, and that in order to lead a good life a man must be at peacewith nature rather than trying to constantly conquer it. Well, I'm not too certain that man couldcan be at peace withnature because nature ain't very peaceful itself. I think, inin thisinstance, Boonhe did everything full out. If it was somethingworthwhile, and he could be convinced by someone he believed in that he shouldgo full out at it, he would. Just as hehe went at the bear and justas he helped Sam Fathers to die. He was hunting squirrels, and he had got thesquirrels up that tree, and the gun, as usual, let him down. If anything, that'sa contemptive commentary on the machine that man thinks hecan depend on when he can't. It lets him down. And Boon's machine let him down. Butthat hadn't frightened Boon. He could fix that thing just as long as somebodyelse didn't come along with a machine that did work and kill all his squirrels. does the miscegenation and incest of Roth Edmunds in "DeltaAutumn" complete a cycle of incest and miscegenation begun by old McCaslin andonly interrupted by the goodness of Buck and Buddy and Ike in the middle? Yes, itit came home. Itif youif that'swhat you mean by complete the cycle, yes, it did.  the purpose of having the annualthe annual hunt[just ajust the opportunity to allow these people to communeagain with nature]nature?it was to go hunting. They liked to go hunting, and that wasitthatsimple. they were going to hunt deerbear anddeerthey were not going to hunt bear and deer, but to keep a yearlyrendezvous with a bear they did not intend to kill. [Well, now,] that'sthat's that little boyremember that has gone into the adult world withwith all theillusions of something fine and splendid. The old people, when they first wentthere, they had that same thought, but now they went back to hunt. Itcould havealso they could go back because they liked it,because they liked theliked the freedom. They liked the senseofof [atavistic] desire to go back to the beginning.Also, theyfor two weeks, they were free of the women folk. There wereall sorts of reasons why they would like to go. It could be summed up simplybecause they liked the two weeksin the bottom during the hunt. They wouldn't havepaused to dig out the other reasons as the little boydid. They could have been there. But those men would never meet on the street,say, "Now boys, let's hook up the mules and go back to commune for two weekswith nature." They'd say, "Let's go back there and kill that big bear that'sthere." Mr. Faulkner Sir, after Sam had takentakencapturedLion, Boon took the dog. Now, why didn't Sam mind that? Sam was a king. He was going to have his hunter folks takecare of the dogs and horses. He turned the dog over to a groom.Sam was a king. He wasn't going to sleep with a dog. He'd let Boon do that. Sir, you said that this story, you think, comes out of your own background. Was there really adogactual dog that might have inspired Lion? We usually had one dog of that general type in our packof bear dogs. He was ausually part Airedale. The houndswouldwould trail the bear and would bay him. And the Airedalewouldwould hold him there until the men on the horses could get up. Lion, as he is in the story, is a fabrication, buthe's based on the dog that we would usually have in our pack,always keep one of that sort. Sir have you ever[the idea of] ? No, not [for me].Mr. Faulkner I hope this is not too obvious a question, but this is not the sort of thingnovels. As weread your books, we see dogs, mules, colored people, white people, Indians,half-breeds who are brave. Braveryit permeates your work. Could you say somethingabout bravery in general? Do you think that a man should feelthat he has to be brave or do you think that men are brave by definition? Do youthink, alsois there less bravery today than there was forty yearsago? No, I don't think so. I thinkthere'sthat bravery is likelike the water inthe earth. Itit don't diminish. It might alter. Sometimes it's clouds.Sometimes it'sit's rivers in the land. Sometimes it's back in theocean again, but it's the same quantity of water. It's constant.ThatI would say that man falls into courage just asyou walk along the street and fall into manhole, that nonobodypossesses it atat his beck and call always, that he himself neverknows whether he will be able to be brave or not. Quite often he is to hisastonishment. I think that some people feel better to believe or have proof thatthey are brave, that they may do dangerous things, just as you take a drink. Itmakes you feel good to know that you are brave. Some people are contentto believe that "I'm going be brave, but I ain't going to go tomuch trouble to find out right now."But Iwould say that the quantity of it is a constantfactor, , a constant [apportioning] to individual people,that too many things will have to do withwith why you're brave at oneparticular moment. Too much goes into it. Maybe somebody's watching you. Youwant to look good, so you're brave. You might be scared to death, but for themoment you're brave because you want to look good to yoursweetheart or to a friend or to newspapers or whatever.One last question?I remember I read mosta good bit of your workaboutoh, about six years ago, I guess, and I read it without anyparticular direction, in no particular sequence. I can remember sort ofstruggling through it and trying to figure out the genealogical table to figureout whose family the people belong to and all. And then one day I read "The Old Man." I never read The Wild Palms. I know it was published in conjunction with "The Old Man." I never read that. But "TheOld Man," I remember, struck me because, as I remember, basically it wasa very simple story. The language was pretty straightforward. There weren't verymany people involved in it. It was sort of a nice, tight, short novel, I guess.And it was into me, at that time, as I remember, it wasentirelyit struck me as being entirely unlikeI guess fromthe point of view of style, if you want to use the term, from anything else I'dread of yoursand I always was interested in how you thought aboutthat particular piece of work in relation to the other thingsyou'veyou've written. That's only half ofof another book. They should never havebeen broken apart that way. That's half, chapter by chapter, with a book calledThe Wild Palms. They should be read together, as Iwrote them. That is simply aa background.It's a counterpoint in a fugue.And, to me, tobreak them to pieces is just as dull asas listening tothe left hand part ofof a piece of Beethovenoror Bach. It don't mean anything to me without both hands. That wasnot my idea to do that. That was the publisher's. It was printed properly in abook called The Wild Palms. They were alternate chapters.This was to emphasize and underline the other story. One was the story ofaof a man and a woman whowho fell in loveandand were destroyed by it, played against the background of a manwho got involved with a woman and went through incredible trouble to get rid ofher, even to go back to the penitentiary to get rid of her.[Thank you very much, Mr. Faulkner]. Thank you.  Well, when you go to the trouble to invent a private domain of your own, thenyou're the master of time, too.I have the right, Ithink, to shift these things around wherever it sounds best,and I can move them about in time and, if necessary, changetheir names. This would be 1906 or '07 this happened. That is, the more you write, themore you've got to compromise with such facts as time and place, and so I've got to agreewith Mr.Gwynn and establish this somewhere in time, so it's about 1907. have you ever such an auction taking place? Yes'm. I bought one of these horses once.Theyappeared in our country. Every summer somebody would come in with another batch of them.They were western range-bred ponies, pintos. Had never had a bridle on them. Had neverseen shell corn before.And they'd broughtbe brought into our town andauctioned off for prices from three or four dollars up to six or seven, and I bought thisone for four dollars and seventy-five cents. I was oh, I reckon ten years old. My father at that time ran alivery stable, and there was a big man. He was six feet and a half tall. He weighed twohundred pounds, but mentally he was about ten years old, too.And I wanted one of thosehorses. My father said, "Well, if you and Buster can buy one for what money you've saved,you can have it."And so we went to the auction, and we bought one for four dollars andseventy-five cents. We got it home. We were going to gentle it. We had a two-wheel cartmade out of the front axle of a buggy with shafts on it, and we fooled with that [creature]. It was a wild animal. It was a wild beast.It wasn't a domestic animal at all, and finally Buster saidthat it was about ready, so we had the cart in a shed. Estelle probably remembers this. Weput a croaker sack over the horse's head and backed it into the cart with two niggersto fasten it in, to buckle traces and toggles and things, and me and Buster got in the seat, and Buster said, "All right boys, let him go." And they snatched the sack off thehorse's head, and it went across the lot. There was a big gate. The lane had turned at asharp angle. It hung the inside wheel on the gatepost as it turned. We were down on onehub then. Then about that time, Buster caught me by the back of the neck and threw me,just like that, and then he jumped off.And the cart wasscattered up that lane, and we found the horse a mile away run into a dead-endstreet. All he had left on him was just the hames, the harness wasgone.  that was a [pleasant] experience. But we kept thathorse and gentled him to where I finally rode him.But I loved that horse because that wasmy own horse. I bought that with my own money. how do you feel about your next novel, or do you always feelthat your next one is the best? Well, the one that I'm going to write this year is going to be thebest. The one that I finished last year, that's finished. That's behind me. There'snothing more I can do to that, but I'm going to do one this year that's still better,which is probably a happy attitude to have toward writing.That is, it'sit's fun to do. It's like some people find playing golf fun to do orcollecting stamps. If you ever get the perfect stamp, there's nothing else to collect. Ifyou ever write a book that suits you exactly, there's nothing else to do, and so you hopethat you really won't write one as good as you think it's going to be, and, of course, youwon't.Mr. Faulkner Do you feel that the gap between the people and the law that exists in "SpottedHorses" has closed any since then? The gap between the people andAnd the law. And the law?Uh huh. Will you explain a little more of what that means?The law is so inappropriate, andandand we feel thatit'sin the end, it's so ridiculous, really. It'sit's so far from thepeople and the way they live, and it doesn't seem to apply to them. I just wondered if youfelt that it were more appropriate now.Yes. Oh, well, that's one of the natural occupational hazards of breathing, is conflictwith the law, with police. I think that all people have to face that and accept it and dothe best they can with it. That'sif she had got her money back, it'd been bad on me because mystory would've blown up.  have you seen any of the productions of Requiemfor a Nun? No, I haven't. I have read the version that Camusdid in French, but then he turned it into an existentialist play,but I've never seen it on the stage.I would like to.Mr. Faulkner Eula Varner seems to be the sort of character who would in some way seems almostlarger than life, seems to be invested with a meaning that's almost symbolic.When you conceived this character, did she seem to represent, let us say, some of the bestaspects of the Varners? Oh, you're quite right. She was larger than life, that she was ananachronism. She had no place there, that that littlelittle hamlet couldn't have held her, andwhen she moved on to Jefferson, that couldn't hold her either, but then that'll be in thenext book, the one that'll be out next month.You'requite right. She was larger than life. She was too big for this world.Mr. Faulkner To what extent are your plots and characters preconceived, or in other words, towhat extent do you outline what is going to happen to your characters before you begin towrite? I don't at all. I get a character andand get him or her started, get him or herinvolved with somebody else, and then they take charge of it. I just gallop along behindto put it down,but they are writing the book by thattime.Youyou have said previously that The Sound and theFury came from an impression of a little girl up in a tree, and I wondered how youbuilt it from that, and whether you just, as you said, let itlet the storydevelop itself. Well, impression is the wrong word. It's more an image. A verymoving image to me was of the children. Of course, we didn't know at that time that onewas an idiot, but there were three boysone was a girl, and the girl was theonly one that was brave enough to climb that tree to look in the forbidden window to seewhat was going on, and that's what the book , and [it] took therest of the 400 pages to explain why she was brave enough to climb the tree to look in thewindow. It was an image, a picture to me, a very moving one, whichwas symbolized by the muddy bottom of her drawers as her brothers looked up into the appletree that she had climbed to look in the window, and the symbolism of the muddy bottom ofthe drawers became the lost Caddy, which had caused onebrother to commit suicide, and the other brother hadhad misused her money thatshe'd sent back to theto the child, the daughter. It was aI thoughta short story, something that could be done in [about] two pages, athousand words. I found out it couldn't. I finished it the first time, and it wasn'tright, so I wrote it again, and that was Quentin. That wasn't right. I wrote it again.That was Jason. That wasn't right. Then I tried to let Faulkner do it. That still waswrong.Mr. Faulkner One thing that we sometimes seem to see with acquisitivepeople like the Snopeses is that after they have made the gains which they want very muchto make, respectability seems to set in and start to work on them, too. Do you see anysigns of that happening in that clan? No, only that the rapacious people, if they're not careful, they are seducedaway and decide that what they've got to have is respectability which destroys one, almostanybody. That is, nobody seems to be brave enough anymore to be an out-and-out blackguardor rascal, that sooner or later he's got to be respectable,and that finishes it.Why aren't there blackguards [then]? They ain't brave and strong and tough like they used to be.Andthat's  why not? It's the curse of the times, maybe.It may be there's a three or four colorprinting of advertisements have been too seductive, or a picture of a finebig car in two colors with a handsome young woman by it, so that you almost think thewoman comes with the new carwhen you make the starterpayments. Money isthere's so much pressure to conform, to berespectable.More than in the Victorian? I think so, yes. In the Victorian, they tried to force you to berespectable to save your soul. Now, they compel you to be respectableto be rich.Were these people blackguards to save their souls? I'm not quite sure Iunderstand the connection. Well, I think that possibly the old Adam in man suggests to him to be ablackguard if he can get away with it, and when there's a great deal of pressure to berespectable, if there is a great enough reward for the respectability, hewill choose that in preference to the pleasure of being a scoundrel and a blackguard, thatpeople don't have enough verve and zest anymore, which is not the fault of man so much asthe fault of the times that we live in to where hethere's too much pressureagainst being an individualist, andand a good first-rate scoundrelis an individualist. He don't really belong to a gang. Once he's got to join a gang, hebecomes a second-rate scoundrel, but a first-rate scoundrel is like a first-rate artist.He's an individualist, and the pressure's all against being an individualist. You've gotto belong to a group. It don't matter much what group, but you've got to belong to it, orthere's no place for you in the culture or the economy. Maybe to belong to agang you might escape the Atom bomb. [This]Are you saying that he has to be a scoundrel to be an individualist? No, sir. I say a scoundrel, to be a good one, must be an individualist. Thatonly an individualist can be a first-rate scoundrel. Only an individualist can be afirst-rate artist. He can't belong to a group or a school and be a first-rate writer. Well, until he was bitten by the bug to be respectable. Then he let me down. I had an admiration for him until then. No, no. He washe turned into ain his way, apretty good boy. He wanted no more of Snopes. He tried to remove himself from the auraand orbit ofSnopes.Somebody once wrote,Imaybe this is apocryphal, thata couple of Snopeses who haven't yet been described, but whowho might [wereto be described], were named Dollar Watch Snopes and Montgomery Ward Snopes. Isthere any truth to that? Yes, there's a Montgomery Wards Snopes. He went to France in 1917 to keep frombeing drafted. He joined the YMCA,and he came back witha batch ofof French pornographic postcards and opened what he called a studio. Hehe had a Basque hat and awindsor tie by that time. He was an artist. His studio had a back door to it,and if people joined the club, they could look at the postcardsuntil the government caught him. That was MontgomeryWard.Did he ever make it back to America? Oh, yes. This was back in Jefferson where he opened his studio.  you said before that it was your belief that man would prevail.Well, in the light of this book The Hamlet and several others thatwe've discussed recently, what type of man do you think will prevail? What kind? Ascoundrel? No, no. The scoundrel in time is seduced away by the desire to be respectable,so he's finished. There's awhat quality in man that prevails, it'sit's difficult tobe specific about, but somehow man does prevail. There's always someone that willwill neverstop trying to cope with Snopes, that will never stop trying to get rid of Snopes. What?[A remnant]? No, the impulse to eradicate Snopes is, in myopinion, so strong that itit selects its champions when the cris comes.When the battlecomes, it always produces a Roland. It doesn't mean that they will get rid of Snopes orthe impulse which produces Snopes, but always there's something in man that don't likeSnopes and objects to Snopes and, if necessary, will step in to keep Snopes from doingsome irreparable harm. There's whatever it is that keeps us still trying topaint the pictures, to make the music, to write the books. There's a great deal ofpressure not to do that because certainly the artist has no place inin nature,and almost no place at all in our American culture and economy, but yet people still tryto write books, still try to paint pictures. They still go to a lot of trouble to producethe music, and a few people will always go to hear the music, which still has nothing todo withwith the number of people that will produce the Cadillac cars or theeconomy which will give everybody a chance to buy a Cadillac car on the installment planor the deep freezers. That is, all that's advertised. It has to be advertised, in order tokeep you [buying it,] but the books, the music, that's not advertised, yetstill there're people that will pay for it and buy the pictures. It's a slow process, butyet it apparently goes on, that we will even outlast the atom andhydrogen bombs. I don't know right now how we will do it, but my bet is we will.Mr. Faulkner There's another version of this story, isn't there? It seems to me I remember onewith a sewing machine agent telling it. I'm sure there is. I have written a dozen versions of it. I wouldIwould have to see them all to unravel them myself,butI'm sure there's any number of versions of it, which is simply thecraftsman's job to try it and try it and try it, to have infinite patience, to try and try andtry until it comes as good as you can possibly make it. When you have reached that point,it still ain't good enough, so you write another one, and you try and try that one, tobring it to the nearest perfection that you are capable of, which still won't be the bestone, so you write another one. When you reach this point where you don't do that anymore,you cut the throat.Mr. Faulkner Along this respectability/scoundrel line, how do you explain Colonel Sutpen, whosweeps into Jefferson and grimly sets himself up, and [along the line]decides he'll have respectability? Marches into town with the willpower that's possiblyequaled only by his motherhis eventual mother-in-law. Does he really lose hisindividuality or is respectability just another notch on his rifle, so to speak? He wanted more than that. He wanted revenge as he saw it, but also he wanted toestablish the fact that man is immortal. Thatthat man, if he isman, cannot be inferior to another man through artificial standards or circumstances. Whathe was trying to dowhen he was a boy, he had gone to the front door of a bighouse, and somebody, a servant, said, "Go around to the back door." He said, "I'm going to bethe one that lives in the big house. I'm going to establish a dynasty. I don't care how."And he violated all the rules ofof decency and honor and pity and compassion,and the fates took revenge on him. That's what that story was. But he was tryingto say in his blundering way that, "Whyshould a man be better than me because he's richer than me, that if I had had the chance Imight be just as good as he thinks he is, so I'll make myself as good as he thinks he isby getting the same outward trappings which he had"which was a big house and servants init. He didn't say, "I'mI'm going to bebe braver or more compassionateor more honest than he." He just said, "I'm going to be as rich as he was, as big as he wason the outside."He never really attained this respectability? No, he wasthe Greeks destroyed him, the old Greekconcept of tragedy. He wanted a son which symbolized thisthis ideal, and he gottoo many sons. His sons destroyed one another and then him. He was left withtheonly son he had left was a Negro.Mr. Faulkner You've said that you regarded respectability as one of the prime enemies ofindividualism. Do you regard love as an enemy of individualism? No, [not at all]. What's love got to do with respectability? No, sir, I do not. Respectabilityis an artificial standard, whichwhich comes from up here. That is,respectability is not your concept or my concept. It's what we think isJones's concept of respectability.I don't mean to defend respectability in love or out. What I meanto do isbe quiet, please.What I mean to ask is this. Isn't there a basic dichotomybetween the kind of individualism which you are praising and the attitude of love? If you will substitute decency for respectability, I would agree with you. Idon't quite follow you between respectability and love, but decency and love. That's aninteresting point. Has anybody else got a thought on that?Well, that's what Harry Wilbourne and the girl in WildPalms discovered, didn't they? That they couldn't get love and respectabilitytogether, they couldn't live in the twentieth century patterns the way they wanted to. Yes, that's right, but then by Smith's conception of respectability, theycouldn't have had that anyway because one was already married. So there was a choice aboutwill we take what we can or will we have a little or nothing, and a little, I think, isalways better than nothing.  do you regard Pylon a serious novel and whatwere you driving at in that novel? To me, they were a fantastic andand bizarre phenomenon onthethe face of aof a contemporary scene, of our culture at a particular time. Iwrote that book because I'd gotten in trouble withwith Absalom, Absalom!, and I had to get away from it for a while, so I thought a goodway to get away from it was to write another book, so I wrote Pylon. They were ephemera and a phenomena on the face of aof acontemporary scene. That is, there was really no place for them ininin the culture, in theeconomy, yet they were there at that time, and everyone knew that they wouldn't last verylong, which it didn't. That time of those frantic little aeroplanes which dashed aroundthe country, and people wanting just enough money to live, to get to the next place torace again, something frenetic and, in a way, almost immoral about it, that they wereoutsideoutside the range ofof God, not only respectability, of love, but ofbut of God,too, that they had escaped the compulsion ofof accepting a past and a future,that they werethey had no past. They were asas ephemeralasas the butterfly that's born this morning with no stomach andwillwill be gone tomorrow, which seemed to me interesting enough to make astory about. But that was just to get away from a book that wasn't going too well until Icould get back at it.I think that perhaps we've used up enough of Mr. Faulkner's energy unless, sir,you feel the wish to carry on a bit more. Surely. If anyone can suggest something we can discuss, by all means. You mightwhen should this stop? What do youWell, it has no set closing hour, butbutwe don't want to tire you. Well, I've told youthis is a dreadful habit to get into where you canstand up in front of people and talk, and nobody can say shut up and sit down. [audience laughter and applause] to share with them our good fortune in having asWriter-In-Residence at the University of Virginia the world's greatest livingnovelist. He began our program last year by reading from his works, but thequestion and answer period that followed was so lively and so prolonged that wethought that this year we would skip the appetizer and begin with the steak. Mr.William Faulkner.  Any question? Somebody must have at least one.   during our formal education we areare taught toadhere to certain grammatical rules, punctuation rules, sentence structure andso forth. Do you think that if a writer attempts to adhere to such rules thathis style is restricted or cramped in any sense? No, sir. I don't think so. It may be that his opportunities forexperimentation are cramped. I think that any language mustcontinue to be alive. That is, it must continue to change or be susceptible tochange, andand grammar, punctuation areare part of thatfluidity. If by experimentation youyou find out if the old ways werethe best or maybe the old ways might be subject to change. I wouldn't say thatit restricts your style because style could be a part of thefluidity ofof the change. Style, if it's alike anythingelse to be alive it must be in motion too. If it becomes fixed, then it's dead.It's just rhetoric. The style must change according to what the writer is tryingto tell. What he is trying to tell, in fact, compels the style.If I'm not speakingloud enough, would you let me know? do you feel that the traditional values of the South havebeen endangered by increased industrialization ? They couldn't be. Thethe values of any thing, to be of anyimportance, must be alive, too. It may be that you won't like to seeindustrialization. You won't like to see the old customs change. But the onlyalternative to change is to cease, to die. And I thinkthat any culture that's worth its salt is going to cope with anychange. That industrialization is not going to destroy anything of value in theSouth. The things of value which areare obsolete will be remembered,and they will be the material forfor writing, forfor art, even though they no longer exist as a motivating quality in thepresent culture. They will exist as awell,the jeweled casket to hold thefine traditions. In the sense that there'sno such thing as "was" really, that every man is the sum of hispast, of his ancestry, and so there's nothing ever ends in that sense. As longas somebody remembers it, it still exists. The good of it will still exist,still be available.  this is a little bit more specific, butis there any redemption within the Snopes family of itself?Will that come or is that going too far [into your next novel]? Possibly. I think that in time evil willwillexhaust its own tools. That is, the Snopes will vanish. There willbe some Snopeses named something else.Andit's not really necessary to redeem Snopeses. Snopeses are an infinitesimal partof the human race of man, and man is, I think, pretty good. Thathe'she's doing all right. That he cancan take on a tribe ofSnopeses and can get rid of them, and they will not have done any great harm totheto the record of man's endeavor. That they are not reallya problem. They are a problem of the moment. And there's alwayssomeone that willwill cope with Snopeses or willwilloutlast Snopeses. Thethe good, the people that are against whatSnopeses represent will last longer than the family of Snopeses will. What influenced your humor most? Yourdid you reada lot of Mark Twain or something like that?  That's a good question. That is, it's a question I'mI'm happyto try to answer. I think that humor is not influenced by whatanyone reads. Itit's an attitude of optimism toward man'spredicament. That if you take man's predicament, the dilemma, tooseriously, that's not too good for anybody. But if you are capable of seeingthat man with all his folly, all the harm [and the shoddiness] he does, that even in hisat his worst, heis capable of doing things in a comical way that he himself didn't intend to do.I don't think you need to ape Mark Twain oror Leacock orany other humorist to write humor. It's a point of view toward man in hisdilemma, which is to me a very healthy point of view. If you cancanlaugh at what man does, then youyou agree that what he does is not going to endurelong enough to do a great deal of harm.Do you think that the southern attitude towards the Negro is the sametoday as when you pictured it in your book Intruder in theDust? No, sir, I think it has changed. I think it has got to changebecause that was a part of a living culture, and as I just said, the onlyalternative to motion is death. So the culture, the Negro's position in thesouthern culture, will alter for the better. I believe that thereare enough people in the South that realize that whether the Negro is nowcapable of equality with the white man, he will have to have the chance to tryto find out, simply because the Negro is also a human being. And there's noposition for a second class human being in a culture opposed to anotherantipathetical culture as the world is today. you've had a number of novels made into movies, andI know you've written some screenplays, and I wonder if you think anovelist, any novelist, if one jeopardizes his position as anovelist by allowing Hollywood sometimes to do a bad job ? No, sir, not at all. I think the writer has done the best he could, thebest he possibly could with that book, that nothing done to that book later canchange itchange what he did and the movies can takethat book and if they want to, if he wants to let them take that bookforfor any reason other than the belief that they're going to improveon it, then they won't hurt it. If he's going towhen the book isfinished, and it is done the way he wants it done, then some movie picturecompany says, "If you'll rewrite this to please us, then we'll give you moneyfor it," and he says, "All right, I willI will rewrite this book beforeanybodyI will destroy this book and write it to suit you," then hehas betrayed his own talent and his own trust, whatever it is that the artistfunctions under. Integrity, call it what you like. But if he has finished thework, done the best he can with it, then nothing can hurt it, in myopinion. I'm interested in Intruder in the Dust, too, inthe last part there, that Gavinyou have the lawyer uncle in that saythat "It would be better if the North, the outsiders, left the South alone tosettle its own problems and sins." Do you still hold that theory, or am I right inthinking that you meant that [to start]? I still hold that opinion, I think that no one can besaved by an outsider. He must be saved from inside himself. That is, the Southmust correct that evil, as it applies to the South, ourselves, that it can't bedone byby laws or philosophical or political theories compelled on usfrom the outside.Well, I was interested in what then should be the outsiders' point ofview, from outside the South. In worrying about the South, what if the South didnot pull itself up by its own bootstraps? They would be worried about the effectupon the rest of the states. Well, in my opinion, the South will have to pull itself up by its ownbootstraps for the reason I just stated, that the only alternative to motion,progress, is death. It's a condition which we have realized much further backthan 1954 was an impossible situation. Our forefathers that foughtthe Civil War knew that. Mr. Jefferson knew that a hundred andfifty years ago. There were people even before Mr. Jefferson that realized thatslavery was anan impossible condition in this country that would haveto be remedied. I think that the outsider who isdoing it because he's a do-gooder serves some purpose in keeping a certainpressure on.But nobody knows when to let well enough alone, and if he couldjust keep the constant, faint pressure and let be at that, he would serve hispurpose, but he gets too enthusiastic with changing overnight acondition which is emotional according to a pattern of morality which he can'tdo.Well, he might not be a do-gooder exactly. Hehe might be aperson worried about the effect upon the country at large, foreign policies orproblems that come up out of traditional southern attitudes, and then I wonderwhether a Senator from Oregon, for instance, wouldsupposewould do [what position could he take that would beacceptable, that would consist of] certain rules and regulations toimpose for the whole country. Well, of course, he would do what he thought the people that elected himwould expect him to do to get electednexttime, but he would still be working on atocompel a system of economic morality on an emotional condition.HeI'm not saying that he's wrong. I'm saying he'simpractical.Speaking of the character of Gavin Stevens in the book, did you have areal life figure that you based him on? I think a writer writes from three sources. One is his own personalexperience, which would include, of course, the books he reads, has read, hisobservation, and his imagination. I doubt if he himself can say just how much ofeach source he has drawn from for this particular page or story or book. Ibelieve, though, that he is convinced that he can create much better people thanGod can.That he will never be satisfied totake anyone he has seen from real life, put into a book, because he wouldimprove on it. I think that maybe a writer is incapable of actually sticking tothe truth, that he is a congenital liar, and he is going to change, alter,anything that hehe touches to put down on paper. So he himself can'tsay just how much of the character he actually saw, how much he heard about, howmuch he imagined. To him that's not too important. Hiswhat he wantsto do is to create characters of his own, yet are so close to life, solife-like, that the people that read the books will say, "Why yes,that'sthat man could be so. In fact, I know somebody a good deal likehim." Though, actually, the character that he put down is not whathe ever saw. He's added something to it. What do you think of the Thomas Wolfe sort of writing[in which some things are] autobiographical and yet other [things are just set in thebackground, in personal observations]? What do you think? I think that any writer is autobiographical in the sensethat he is writing from those three reservoirs which I just spoke of.That he iswriting a man in terms of himself. That is, hehe is writing a man ashe saw it. And I wouldn't know, probably Mr. Wolfe don't know howmuch he was writing of what he himself saw. He is writing mainly of what hehimself believed he saw and heard and imagined, that what he believed is truthas he knows it. But he would be, even if he were writing his own life, heprobably couldn't stick to the truth.  To what factors do you believe the success of your work has been what you hoped it would be? I have to ask you what you mean by success. Popularity or the sale of the book, perhaps. Well, I wouldI'd say that came from the factthat I have always kept myself an amateur. I've never thought of myself as aprofessional. I've done this for fun, and it didn't really matter to me whetheranybody read it or not. Success is feminine, and quite oftenif youif you beg and plead, she scorns you. If you showthe back your hand to her, she clings to your knees.But I think it's because I have triedto be an amateur, and I've done it just for fun, not to get rich,not to make money, nor to be famous, but because it was fun. It was something Ifound to do that was the most fun of anything I'd tried yet. I never could quitedo it, and so I'd never be bored with it. That each time I finished a book itwasn't as good as I wanted it to be, but I still had some more paper, so I'dwrite another one tomorrow, and maybe that one would be.If any of you think of being writers that's thefirst advice I would give you, is to keep it amateur, do it for fun. It's hardwork, I grant you, but do it for fun because you like to do it.  [for example, in Pylon, you touch on the city of New Orleans,wherewas that in a way true to life][you had yourobservations] ? That was a mixture of all three. That New Orleans wasn't quite the NewOrleans I lived in at one time. That airport wasn't quite the airport that Ihave operated aircraft out of at various times. But just how much of it wastrue, how much of it was lies, I would have to go back over the book with apencil andand postulate as I went along. But the writerishe ishe is too busy. He is not interested in facts, yousee. He is interested in truth, the fundamental truth, of mans' struggle withinhis predicament, his dilemma. That he willwill be asasstrict as he can to the standards of integrity regarding the truthofof man's passions and hopes and fears and aspirations. But he'llpay very little attention to physical facts. He won't care whether it isTuesday, 1958 or Tuesday, 1956. Or whether New Orleans is in Louisiana or inOregon. It don't matter to him.Mr. Faulkner? In the novelthat novel Pylon, could thetitle, could the title refer to the girl Laverne, the marker or beacon aroundwhich all the other, all the men gravitate? Now, there's some more of this erudite, professorial symbolism[gets into everything]. I'm sure that you're quite right, I just hadn't thought of that.I'mI'm glad to know it. I'll remember that. I'll use that sometimeprobably.  What about this matter of symbolism, Mr. Faulkner? Are you ever consciousof some of the symbols you've been accused of using? The writer's like a carpenter. He has aa grabbag, a barrel full of odds and ends, of boards and nails, andandthe sort of things that he might possibly some day need, and when he'sbusy in the heat of writing his story, he needs something, so he reaches backand scrabbles around in his barrel until he finds somethingthat fits. Of course, theI think that one reads fromthe same background that the writer writes from. That is, the culture. Theculture contains this symbolism which has been established and described bythe experts, the psychiatrists and psychologists, and sincetheone man writes from it, another reads from it, it's natural thatthe symbolism should appear. And since thewell, in our case now, weboth read and write from a culture we call the culture of the Christian culture,and naturally symbols will be identifiable because they are part of the very airthat both the writer and the reader have breathed through education, and theexperiences of being a child, of being taught to be a Christian child, or thechild of cultured parents. But I don't think the writer has got time to say "NowI'm going to writeget a few symbols into this one."He's too busy. He's writing about people, yousee, writing about human beings and the individual people in their strugglesinside the human condition. He's trying to tell that story in the most dramaticway he can, and when he realizes by instinct that a symbol will help him, hereaches back in his carpenter's catch-all and gets out a symbol. But he's notdeliberately writing symbols. You said you didn't deliberately write symbols, but you are [doingthat], I think, and I would like to ask youif you saw the symbol in the bear, in the shortstory "The Bear"? Since I've been up here and discussed it I see lots of symbolism that I wastoo busy at the time, at the time Thewell, the one symbol was the bear representedthethe vanishing wilderness. The little dog that wasn'tscared of the bear represented the indomitable spirit of man. I'll havetohave to dig back and get up some more of those symbols but Ihave learned around an even dozen that I've put into that storywithout knowing it.But they are two prettygood ones that you can hold to. May I ask what you think of James Joyce? James Joyce was one of the great men of my time. He waselectrocuted by the divine fire. He, Thomas Mann were the greatwriters of my time. He was probablymight have been the greatest, buthe was electrocuted. He had more talent than he could control.  a great deal of attention in recent years has beendevoted to the idea that perhaps man's life as he lives it from day to day isspeeded up rather tremendously, and that this has had effects on his thinking.I'm wondering first of all if you believe this is true, and if you do believeit's true, if this has had an effect on what he wants to read or what he wantsto be told? I don't believe it has had any effect on what he wants to read and whathe wants to be told, as it's inside him. The effect has been ononwhat he has been told he wants to read. That's the pressure toconform, to belong to groups, to read the book of the month, or to own the sameCadillac, or to have the same two children, or to have a housethat has everything in it that all the other houses on the streethave. But basically hehehehe is puzzled overthe same fundamental problems that he has always been puzzled over ever sincehe found that he had a soul and stood up out of the mud. I think the other'sephemeral and on the surface andand will pass away. That it's nothingto be concerned about. There's a great deal of pressure on him tolet somebody else decide for him what he shall read, what he shall think, whathe shall do. But I don't think that will last. I don't think that he pays anyattention to it, actually. just what do you consider man'sdilemma? I mean by that his situation. He wants to live ina world that's peaceful, where he can have the simplethings he wants, and yet he'she's always involved with overproductionin one place and underproduction in another, and the threat of wars and atombombs, and he stillinstead of giving up, he still tries to dosomething about that, he still struggles within that dilemma to make it the onehe wants, in which all people can be happy, in which little children won't haveto suffer, in which the weak would be protected. His dilemma is simply to makeit work. There's astory's from the Chinese, I thinkat one time, youmay know this, cats were the first form of life on earth. They had tried to makecivilization work, to get rid of wars and poverty and pestilence, and it didn'twork, so they summoned all the wise cats to a congress, and they said that wewill choose some other form of life that is optimistic enough to believe thatman can live in peace and plenty, but foolish enough not to believe that he willfail again. So that's why the cat lives with you, and he won't work, and hedon't love you. Maybe that's why the cat looks [at us] the way he does. Sir, what do you think will aid the South in pulling ourbootbootstraps up? Education. Better education than we've got.And do you think that education will[up] the people [in time before] ? It Well that's a good question. Thethe trouble isthe South has got to be educated better in order to educate theinferior southerners, regardless of what color they are. The problem now is ofwhether the inferior, the uneducated southerner will wait thatlong anymore. But I don't know of anything better to do than to alter our systemof education so that the best can get the best of education. I don't know ofanything else that will help us or save us.  do you believe thatdo you feel optimistic aboutthe enduring values in current American fiction by the younger writers, sayunder forty-five?Do you see any potential change in trends that will be oflasting literary value. I can't give a good answer because like my most writers as I get older Iread less and less. It's been a long time since I have read my coevals. But I'mconvinced that that is the strongest motivation in man, is to create,to produce literature, music, art. That's most enduring thing he has created andI think that nothing, not even the atom bomb, is going to stop him. I would saythat now the young writer is subject to that same pressure toconform, to belong to something, which I spoke of. But I thinkthat by the time he is thirty, if he has afirst rate talent, he will have outgrown that. And I'm convinced that the goodwork will still be produced. It's comforting for a lazy manto say, "Well, I would have been a good artist, if I'd been bornif Ihadn't been so unlucky as to be born in this time." I think that's nonsense.That the good man is going to produce no matter when he's born, what age he is in.That he will use that age as his material just asas a part of thereservoirs of observation and experience. And that he will produce the work,too, if he has the talent and works, that nothing will stop him. AndI used to think that ittalent was important. I think maybe all heneeds is ruthlessness, industry and insight. That is to throw awayanything that seems to him untruthful or shoddy, to work hard, to be alwayscurious as to know why man does what he does. I think that if the young writerhas those three qualities he can write. I'm curious as to whenwhyI wonder how the modernwriter justifies using violence in his work. I've been struck by it andsometimes upset by it. I think that is one of the tools. That's a particular saw, hammer that theparticular carpenter feels he can do the most with, that he might not like theviolence either. It's simply because he does not have a better tool to show manin his tragic or comic moments inside the predicament. That is, the dramaticstory is, man is facedthe frail, fragile creature of flesh and bone,mostly water, in a ramshackle universe stuck together with electricity, facedwith problems which are usually bigger than he is. The story is, does he faceit? Does it lick him? Or does he beat it? Or if it licks him, does he get beatento his knees still, as Hemingway says, "Looking good." That, I think,is what anyone writes about. It's man that is striving to be braverthan he might be, more honest than he might be, to be compassionate.And it's so important in twentieth century, more than in other centuries [to write about this]? Well, no, it's always been important. I think that's what makes manendure and what will cause him to endure, that he is capable of wanting to bebrave and to be honest and to be compassionate, and he will last. He's outlastedhis dinosaurs. He'll outlast his atom bomb. My belief is that the last sound onearth, when this earth is a red rock freezing, will be two folks building anairship and fussing about where they're going next.Man is all right. You can't beat him. No,there'll be three. The other one will be writing a book about it.   when you begin to write a novel, do you have it plannedfrom beginning to end? Not always. It'sit's a little more instinctive than that. Itcould begin with a character. It could begin with an anecdote. Andout of that the book grows in order to explain why the person got in thatparticular procomplexity. Isome people work from plots,but I never could do it, just like I never did do any research. Iit'smore fun to me to invent, I think, than to hunt up a fact.Butand thisI wish it were as simple as that, butit'sit's not. Youthe writer, I think, never knows justwhere that germ came from that started him off. Well, in some of our writing classes at Chapel Hill, wehavewell, we've been discussing withthe ways you go aboutwriting a novel and a short story. Andand one of the theories we'vebeen [dealing] with is that a short story is planned, outlined,from beginning to end, whereas in a novelit seems that most noveliststend to just find themselves as they go along. Do you find that's[true]? I don't quite agree with that. If you mean by planned, outlined into apatternThat's for short stories. Yes.And the novel, you just kind of find the novel and yourself in it,or No, I think they both come from the same source. I ratethe ability to write in three degrees. The first degree, thehighest, of course, is the poet. He can say insay it in fourteenlines. I rate next the short story writer. He can say it in ten pages. I ratelast the novelist because it takes him three or four hundred pages.But itthat's a matter of working. Ifyou work from notes, from something physical that you can look at in front ofyou, then you work that way, no matter what you're writing. Maybe the poet does.If you plan it all inside before you put down anything, then that's the way thatyou do it, novel, short story, or sonnet. I don't think thatcould be a procedure, a rule for procedure. Actually, the novelistwishes he could say it in ten pages. In fact, all that any writer wants to do isto say it in one absolute word, the poet, the short story writer, or thenovelist. If he could state some moving, tragic, fundamental, eternal truth ofman's struggle within man's heart in one word, that's what he wants to do. He'llnever do it, and that's why he's never bored. He never touches satiation in hisvocation. There's always some reason to get up tomorrow morning and rub yourhands and go back to work.Mr. Faulkner Apropos of the last question asked, so far as I understood it, and apropos ofthe first question asked, I wonder if you would care to comment a little morebroadly upon the effect of formal education on the creative writer? I hope I'm not going to step on any toes now.I don't believe that formal education ever made awriter or ever hurt him. I think a writer is omnivorous. He will use [someday] anyexperience. That formal education has taught him one very valuable quality,which is mental discipline. He could teach himself mental discipline. Hewouldn't have to have formal education for that. Formal education simplysimplifies his field of research. That he is offered by experts, ininthe simplest way, knowledge, which he probably very likely will need and willuse. Without formal education he would have to dig it out himself. But I don'tthink that formal education could take a man and turn him into awriter.  a few minutes ago you mentioned personal experience as oneof the sources, including that in books that you have read. According to that,what is your opinion of such writers as Stephen Crane and Dreiser and FrankNorris in relation to your own work? No writer is really interested in who wrote the book. He's interestedonly in the book. So I could probably find more influence of characters ofCrane's on what I've written than influence from Crane himself.That the onlything that's interesting to the writer is how someone else has taken man andfrom those three sources has created him in a slightly new or slightly awryawrylight in his comic or tragic struggle within his own environment or his owndilemma. Everything the writer has read from the telephone book up hasinfluenced him. He's amoral, omnivorous. He will rob and steal from any source,because he is not only willing but if anyone after him robs and steals from him,he's flattered. That means that he did it pretty well if somebody else wants tosteal it.   with all this talk of conformity, particularly literaryconformity, don't you suppose that there's either less of it than talk of it hastaken for granted or that it's ? Would you ask me that again please, Ma'am?In other words, don't you think there's less literary conformity than isconstantly talked about? Oh. Well, I don't think there's any such thing as literaryconformity. The pressure to conform is not to be literary. It's to belong to aneconomic strata. That literaliterature can't be conformed. The onlyrestriction it submits to is that of language. And that's only in the terms ofthe reader. That no first-rate writer is going to bother aboutwriting like Hemingway or like Mark Twain. He's too busy. He's writing aboutpeople. If anythingany trick Hemingway learned is good, he will stealit from Hemingway or from Twain, but he's not going to conform anybody's schoolofof literature. He's writing about people. And if he belongs to aschool of literature, it's because they are pleasant folks to talk to and drinkwith until two and three o'clock in the morning, not to write like.Mr. Faulkner Speaking of language, you said that the two great influences on thewestern world and writing are the Bible and the Greek myths and that the latterare dying out such as, in terms that we speak of, cultures or parts of culturesdying out, and yet it's feasible that a writer understands those myths and workswith them. It's a tenuous question but is it still legitimate for him to expresshimself inin an old, outmoded form of language, such as myths, eventhough he's pretty sure that people who read him will not understand him, atleast right away? If he feels that that is the best way for him to isolateman in the motion of being alive, inside his dilemma, yes, by all means. He canuse anyany means, any method, he likes. But if he is going to writejust to use means or method of style, he's simply writing rhetoric, and he wouldbe better off at something a little more fun than that. That thestory itself compels its symbolism, compels itsits style, I think.That the writer, as I said, simply reaches behind him with one hand while he'swriting with the other and drags out a symbol which he thinks is exactly thescrap of wood he needs to make that joint with, which is, in my opinion,perfectly legitimate. If he is dealing simply with man in motion then he hasobeyed all the compulsion of his craft on him. He can use whatevermethod he likes, just as long as he sticks to the primary compulsion, which isto deal with man in motion, in a believable, a credible, dramaticway. Not to judge, simply to describe man struggling within his predicament, inhis unceasing conflict with himself, with his fellows, with his environment. Anymethod he uses, in my opinion, is all right. You tell us in Absalom that Miss Rosa writespoetry, and I've always been curious about what kind of poetry Miss Rosa . It would probably have been gothic love poetry, fourth-rate. Mr. Faulkner What do you think of the dramatizations that have been made of your workfor the movies and for the play coming out next year? I saw Intruder in the Dust.I thought that wasa pretty good picture.It was agood deal like my book.The others, I neversaw. That play which will be in New York nextnext fallis the way I wrote it. That hasn't been changed. Thatwas sections of a book that was told in play form because thatseemed to me the best way to tell the story of man struggling in his dilemma. SoI used play form. The others I haven't seen becausewell, I'd donethe best I could with that book, and I was interested in writing another onewhich would be better, I thought, and I just didn't have time to go to see it.And then picture shows come at the wrong time of day for me.It'sthat's the time of day I like to be at home and havea drink or two and then eat supper and sit down and smoke and read for a while,not to go out to the picture show. Yes'm.[you often] talk about man's [condition] and man's dilemma, and I hear people [more poignant in the South]? No, that's simply because the writer to save time can write about whathe knows best. Then there's less chance of somebody, saying "Uh uh, you'rewrong. Thatfolks don't do that in Keokuk."  the samefor your ideas? Yes, I think that people are the same everywhere. Their problems, theirimmediate problems, are different but, theirtheir strugglewithinwithin the fundamental, simple human truths isthe same everywhere, I think. One writes about his own native land simplybecause that saves him having to do research to keep people from checking up onhim.That it'sit's easier. Itsavessaves time. He's writing about something that's familiar, thathe haswell, you might say, not only seen, but smelled, too. Does that mean in a short story like "Dry September" the situation is ? Yes. In which aa woman, in that condition offrustration after menopause or about menopause, could have caused that sort oftragedy. It wouldn't necessarily have to have aa colorednote in it. Not necessarily that same story, but she could have caused that samegrief, injustice, crime. Pertinent to that, I'd like to ask why is it that Mississippi seems sovery active in a literary way, and yet we don't find the same phenomenon in NewJersey?  Well, that'sthat's because Mississippi is in the South andNew Jersey's in the North.I thinkIthink that the wisest thing any nation can do when it gets itself into any sortof a economic muddle is to pick out some rich nation and declare war on it, andget licked and then be supported. The folks in the South write because the Northhas supported us ever since 1865.We hadplenty of time to write.Would you comment on this? It would seem to me in talking to other peopleabout your work thatthe ladies in Richmond, this class, southernladies in general, do not know your work as well as people in other parts of thecountry, in Europe. Have you observed that? Do you think that's true? I think that's because everybody in the South is writing. Nobody hastime to read [anything].  Sir, you speak of finishing a novel and then sitting down to write abetter one. Do you feel that your last book iswhatever it is, is thebest that you've done, to date I mean? Taken at any time? No, sir. I think to the writer there's no good, better, best. It's gotto be the best or it's nothing. And none of them are good enough to suit me. Idon'tas I said, the writer don't give a damn what anybody else thinksabout this book.Yeah. It ain't good enough to suit me, so I'm gonna write another one. And ifI live another hundred years, maybe I'll do it. I probably won't,but I'll keep on trying. But the work isnever suits thewriter. That's why it's the happiest of all vocations because younever touch satiation. You're never bored. There's something to get up to and goto work at tomorrow.  I've been puzzling since asking my question. What did youmean when you said that Joyce was electrocuted? Only that he had a tremendous talent. He tried too hard toput the whole tragic history of man's struggle within his dilemma on the head ofa pin. I think that is a feeling that everyevery writer,every artist has, that I will be here only for a very short time, andthisthis tragic, beautiful dilemma of mankind is so moving that Imust put it down, and I may not live long enough to finish the book, so I'll tryto do it in one sentence, one word. Joyce was trying to do it all in one Englishsentence, which was Ulysses, and in one English word,which was Finnegans Wake. Do you feel that a good writer should necessarily be a regionalist in thesense that he should write about those things that he knows best? He is writing about people, and people, in my opinion, are not regional.They are universal. Theythe same hopes, aspirations, tragedies areuniversal everywhere, no matter what color nor what race. The writer is regionalonly in the sense that he is using something that he is familiar with to savehimself the time of research. He is not trying to be a regional writer when hewrites about the East Tennessee mountains or about California. He is simplyusing the material that he is most familiar with to save himself the trouble ofhaving to read up Chamber of Commerce brochures on Portland, Oregon, forinstance.  Where did you first [really]get yourget your interest in Indians? Wasit from relics or living near them in Mississippi or? That's a part ofof my culture, my North Mississippi culture.Our country iscompared to the country east of the mountainsiswas frontier only a hundred years ago. Remnants ofChickasaw families still live. They're still my neighbors. Someareareare mixed with Negroes. Others are mixed with whitepeople. The traditions are still there. Therein my childhood,boyhood, there were old men that could remember having heard their fathers tellthem about the old days. The Indian names are still on the creeks and branches.The old roads, the old hilltops, still have the Indian names with the tribalsignificance. work a certain number of hours [at a time], or do youwait for inspiration? I don't have to wait for inspiration, if we can use that term. Mytrouble now is to keep fromto find some good reason notto work. I don't like to work. I put it off as long as I can. When the demonbegins to worry me and nag me too much, then I will sit down and write. But Inever have used any system, though some people do. Just like I've never keptnotes. I will put off the work ofby any means I can think of. Thenwhen I've got to get it done, I will sit down and write a batch of it, so I cantake off a week and not work.I'm lazy. I'm sure that we all join in thanking you for being with ustoday. Well, thank you, ladies and gentlemen. Ladies and gentlemen, onbehalf of the seminar committee, may I welcome you to this twenty-sixthWashington and Lee seminar in literature. The committee wishes me also toexpress our appreciation to the University of Virginia for this gracious loantoday of their most distinguished writer-in-residence. We are especiallyindebted to Professors Frederick Gwynn and Joseph Blotner, who have accompaniedhim here. Our speaker intends to read from his latest novel, The Town, and at the conclusion of that he will welcome questions fromyou all. It would be presumptuous indeed for me to attempt any formalintroduction of our speaker today, but it is certainly my very great privilegeto present to you Mr. William Faulkner of Oxford, Mississippi. I'm an amateur at this. I don'tthink I have a very good voice, and if I don't speak loud enough, would youplease tell me? There is a ridge; you drive on beyond Seminary Hill andin time you come upon it: a mild unhurried farm road presently mounting tocross the ridge and on to join the main highway leading from Jefferson tothe world. And now, looking back and down, you see all Yoknapatawpha in thedying last of day beneath you. There are stars now, just pricking out as youwatch them among the others already coldly and softly burning; the end ofday is one vast green soundless murmur up the northwest toward the zenith.Yet it is as though light were not being subtracted from earth, drained fromearth backward and upward into that cooling green, but rather had gathered,pooling for an unmoving moment yet, among the low places of the ground sothat ground, earth itself is luminous and only the dense clumps of trees aredark, standing darkly and immobile out of it.  Then, as though at signal, thefireflieslightning-bugs of the Mississippi child'svernacularmyriad and frenetic, random and frantic, pulsing; notquesting, not quiring, but choiring as if they were tiny incessantappeaseless voices, cries, words. And you stand suzerain and solitary abovethe whole sum of your life beneath the incessant ephemeral spangling. Firstis Jefferson, the center, radiating weakly its puny glow into space; beyondit, enclosing it, spreads the County, tied by the diverging roads to thatcenter as is the rim to the hub by its spokes, yourself detached as GodHimself for this moment above the cradle of your nativity and of the men andwomen who made you, the record and chronicle of your native land profferedfor your perusal in ring by concentric ring like the ripples on living waterabove the dreamless slumber of your past; you to preside unanguished andimmune above this miniature of man's passions and hopes anddisastersambition and fear and lust and courage and abnegationand pity and honor and sin and pride all bound, precarious and ramshackle,held together by the web, the iron-thin warp and woof of his rapacity butwithal yet dedicated to his dreams.   They are all here, supine beneath you, stratified andsuperposed, osseous and durable with the frail dust and thephantomsthe rich alluvial river-bottom land of old Issetibbeha,the wild Chickasaw king, with his Negro slaves and his sister's son calledDoom who murdered his way to the throne and, legend said (record itself saidsince there were old men in the county in my own childhood who had actuallyseen it), stole an entire steamboat and had it dragged intact eleven milesoverland to convert into a palace properly to aggrandise his state; the samefat black rich plantation earth still synonymous of the proud fading whiteplantation names whether weI mean of course theyeveractually owned a plantation or not: Sutpen and Sartoris and Compson andEdmonds and McCaslin and Beauchamp and Grenier and Habersham and Holston andStevens and De Spain, generals and governors and judges, soldiers (even ifonly Cuban lieutenants) and statesmen failed or not, and simple politiciansand over-reachers and just simple failures, who snatched and grabbed andpassed and vanished, name and face and all. Then the roadless, almostpathless perpendicular hill-country of McCallum and Gowrie and Frazier andMuir translated intact with their pot stills and speaking only the oldGaelic and not much of that, from Culloden to Carolina, then from Carolinato Yokpatawpha still intact and not speaking much of anything except nowthey called the pots "kettles" though the drink (even I can remember this)was still usquebaugh; then and last on to where Frenchman's Bend lay beyondthe southeastern horizon, cradle of Varners and ant-heap for the northeastcrawl of Snopes.  And you stand thereyou, the old man, alreadywhite-headed (because it doesn't matter if they call your gray hairspremature because life itself is always premature which is why it aches andanguishes) and pushing forty, only a few years from fortywhilethere rises up to you, proffered up to you, the spring darkness, theunsleeping darkness which, although it is of the dark itself, declines thedark since dark is of the little death called sleeping. Because look how,even though the last of west is no longer green and all of firmamentfirmament is nowone unlidded studded slow-wheeling arc and the last of earth-pooledvisibility has drained away, there still remains one faint diffusion, sinceeverywhere you look about the dark panorama you still see them, faint aswhispers: the faint and shapeless lambence of blooming dogwood returningloaned light to light as the phantoms of candles would.  And you, the old man, standing there while there risesto you, about you, suffocating you, the spring dark peopled and myriad, twoand two seeking never at all solitude but simply privacy, the privacydecreed and created for them by the spring darkness, the spring weather, thespring which an American poet, a fine one, a woman and so she knows, calledgirls' weather and boys' luck. Which was not the first day at all, not Edenmorning at all because girls' weather and boys' luck is the sum of all thedays: the cup, the bowl proffered once to the lips in youth and then nomore; proffered to quench or sip or drain that lone one time and even thatsometimes premature, too soon. Because the tragedy of life is, it must bepremature, inconclusive and inconcludable, in order to be life; it must bebefore itself, in advance of itself, to have been at all.Any questions, please don't hesitate.  are you working on a new novel at this time?Thethe curse and the pleasure of being a writer isyou never get done. You're always working at something. I think that's why it'sthe best vocation of all, because you never touch satiety. You're never bored.There's always something to wake up for tomorrow morning. And so any writer isalways working. He never finishes work. He won't live that long.Is The Town the second part of a trilogy?The third one will be called the TheMansion. That will be the story of the family of Snopeses. That's theone I'm working at now.What do you consider your bestnovel? I think that my feeling is the feeling that all writers have. None ofthem are quite good enough. They arethey are failures. He has donethe best he can with it. It wasn't quite good enough to suit him. He doesn'tcare what anybody else thinks about it. It's got to please himself, and so he isgoing to write another one tomorrow. And he will keep on planning to write thatother one tomorrow as long as he lives. So I haven't written the one that Ithink is good enough to suit me yet.I thinkthe only way that the writer cancan measure, can gauge his work, isby the one that cost him the most anguish and trouble, just as theparent has a tenderness for the afflicted child. The one that Ithink of with the most tenderness is the one that caused me the most trouble.That is the most unsatisfactory because itit was trying to match whatseemed to me the finest dream, and it failed.  When you say it doesn't satisfy,[what would be the ideal literary work]?In other words,  what would be the aim of a literary ? The aim, of course, is unattainable, which is why it willalways be an aim. I think it's to taketo take man, an instance of manin his struggle, within his predicamentto isolate it in the most movinginstant which one can, so that in that single work there willbe the whole history of the human heart,all the struggle and anguish ofofof man's heart, to be in one picture,one piece of music, one book. That's impossible to do. That's why the artisthasis the luckiest of all occupations. He has something thathethat's worth devoting hisin his opinion, his life to,that he knows he will never touch and will never be bored with. what American writersdo you enjoy reading? I enjoy reading all of them, and I think all writers agree with me,except Faulkner, we'll say.Ithink that any writer must have an insatiable curiosity about people, andfiction books are simply the records of man in the moments of histriumphs or disasters, told by experts. For that reason, I doubt if any writerhas very much judgment about what he reads. He will read anything. As he getsolder, he will go back to certain books, to certain characters, as he would gointo another town, say, twenty five miles away to spend an afternoon with an oldfriend. That to the writer it doesn't matter who wrote that book, so I can'tspeak of books in terms of who wrote them, but there are books that I willalways like, that I loved when I was twenty-one years old, that I will still goback to. [Could you say something about][On The Road][Kerouac]? The sad thing about a writeras he gets old, he reads less andless. The books that I read are the books I knew when I was twenty-one yearsold, unless someone says, "This is a good book. You will like it. Read it." Andso this book you speak of, I haven't read yet. I intend to, but I haven't readit yet. The only work of a young man I'm at all familiar with is Salinger. ButI intend to, and I'm ashamed that I have not read it yet, but I willdo that. I think that the pleasure in reading isinexhaustible too, that one should read and one misses a great deal of pleasuresimply because he is not familiar with the book. He hasn't seen that book. Also,living as I do, I'm aI consider writing my hobby, not my trade. I'm afarmer, actually, and the people I know are not literary people, and I don'tkeep up with [these] books. Sir, have you read any of theelaborate critical analyses of your own works ? No, sir. I don't read that. I prefer to read fiction. Sir, I'd like to know  What is your opinion of it? That in moving pictures?Long Hot Summer. I haven't seen that.I'm not trying tobebe funny about it. It's simply because the writer has done the besthe can with his book. He works in complete isolation and solitude. To make amoving picture oror a theater playcannot be done that way.That is a communal business. The actor gives something to it. Thedirector gives something to it. And whatever the moving picturedoes to that book, it can't change what I did. It mayit may improveit, but what it improves, its result, will be something different from what Idid. And that's one reason, and I reckon the other reason is in my hometown thepicture show begins at seven o'clock in the evening, and that's the wrong timefor me to go anywhere. That's when I like to be at home and have a drink or twoand something to eat and then smoke for a while.  Would you care to comment on the writing [you've done while you were]in Hollywood? It was a pleasant way to make some money.I did it mainly because I know a director. Heraises and breeds horses, and he has an airplane which he would let me fly whenI needed one. Hewe hunt and fish together. And when he is making a picture, and hegets in trouble with it and thinks I might be able to do something about it, hesends for me. That's all the moving picture work I've done. It's notmymy cup of tea, actually, it'sfor the reason I've stated.That itis a matter of a lot of people working together, when the writerhas to get off into solitude and isolation to do the work. And I never could,well you might say, take it seriously. Even the money wasn't something to betaken seriously. It was too much for anybody raised in Mississippi to see all atonce. Do you consider Salinger tobe one of our better writers ? I was impressed with one book of his. It seemed to me that it showedait's not a fault, it's an evil that the writer has gotto arm himself againstwhich is the pressure of our culture tocompel everyone to belong to something, to a group. It's difficult to be anindividual in our culture. I think that what I saw inin that book wasa tragedy which, in a way, represented Salinger's own tragedy. There wasaa young man, intelligent, a little more sensitive thanmost, who simply wanted to love mankind, and when he tried to break intomankind, to love mankind, man wasn't there. That, to me, was the tragedy of thatbook. That, to me, is the threat which all the young writersnowadays have got to be on guard against, the pressure to relinquish, submerge,individuality, the "me," into a mass of "us."And I thinkthat any first-rate writing has been in terms of the individual,who even in the moil and teem of the world was still "me," "myself." He gothis elbows skinned and his head bumped now and then, but just withother heads and other elbows, not with machinery. There was nothing in the teemand moil ofof the world to destroy his soul bycompressing him into a relinquishment of the "Iam." Do you think the novel ? I would say itit would go through phases like any other formof life or motion. It's got to be in motion. It's got to change. The onlyalternative to change is stasis, which is death. And itit willchange, yes. It may go into another medium. The novel may go into somethingvisual, into moving pictures. But the novel asaa quality will not change as long asas peopleare trying to record man's victories and defeats, in terms of the recognizablehuman heart. Let's say that, as I put it, the highest form of writing isthe poem. The poet has taken that tragic, beautifulmoment of man's struggle within his dilemma and put it into fourteen lines. Thesecond highest is the short story writer, who has been able to do it in tenpages. The novelist is the failure. He's a failed poet. It took him three hundred pages toisolate that tragic, beautiful, moving dilemma, victory or defeat, of fragile,invincible man in his dilemma. So the novel may change, but itsitwill never vanish as a quality in culture. John Steinbeck says that in America the writer is a littlebelow the acrobat and a little above the seal, and I wonder what you thoughtabout that?  No, I don't rate the writer quite between the acrobat and the seal, asSteinbeck said. I think that the fact that the writer in this countryis treated with a slightly cavalier treatment might be good for himbecause one thing that the writer must have in order to be a good writer ishumility. He must not take himself too seriously. He must take what he is doingwith complete seriousness, but he mustn't take what he does with very muchseriousness. He must keep himself an amateur. And so that may be pretty good forhim. Maybe if this country gave writers more kudos and morerecognition, then they'd spend all their time walking around with their chestsswelled up, seeing who was looking at me now. But they wouldn't work. But I don't think I would rateyou can't rateanyone dealing with something as intangible asas the human spirit.It's impossible to rate him, unless you are going to look on his rating with thefinance company he is buying his refrigerator or his car from. [ have you done any hunting and fishing]?  Yes, sir, I have done some quail shooting up near Warrenton with somefriends there, and two days ago I went up into the Blue Ridge on Mormon's Riverafter trout. I have been up the headwaters of the Rapidan, but I have not beenin Virginia in the fall enough to do much hunting.Sir [When you are writing a book][very broad scope]? No, I think the writer is writing primarily for himself. He really don'tcare a continental whether anybody else reads it or not.That he has, whilewhile alive, hehashas seen man inwith all his baseness, his folly, afragile web ofof bones and flesh, mostly water, in a ramshackleuniverse stuck together with electricity, whoand yet he has [the faith]to be braver than he thinks he can be, to be more honorable than he thinks hecan be. He has had pity and compassion when he didn't know he was going to doit. He has met problems bigger than himself, and he has tried to solve them.Maybe he got his brains beaten out, but he still tried. The artist is not tryingto deliver a message. He is simplyhas been moved so by thin, frail,fragile man in his dilemma, faced with things so much bigger and tougher andstronger than he, yet still trying to do something to solve his problem. Thatit's worth isolating in some tragic and moving moment, to get down on paper. Then he worries about if somebody else might read it. At the moment, he simplyhas seen something so beautiful, so moving, so important to himself, that hewants to put it down lest he forget it. After that comes the thought somebodyelse might read this. In my own case, I think I wrote for ten or fifteen yearsbefore it ever occurred to me that strangers might read it. [the South has been for the last fifty years one of the most backwardareas] financially and in many other ways. The schools, also, are not consideredby most people to be as good as in other areas. But yet your own state ofMississippi and the South in general have produced most [greater novelists][I wonder if you care to comment on this]? One reason is that there's so many folks in Mississippi that can't readthat they have to write.I would saythat'sthat's not true only in Mississippi. I'd say that that's truealmost throughout thewhat we think of as the South. I believe if Iwere a nation, and I had struggled along, and I wasn't doing too good, that Iwould pick out some big, rich country and declare war on them and let them lickme, and then they'd have to support me for the rest of my life.And I think that maybe with theNorth, having supported us since 1865, we've had plenty of time to write.  Did you have a certain style that you would more or less?  I don't like my style either. I think that What I'm trying to say is that I think that nowriter has got time to bother too much about writing style or writing rhetoric.If he does, he has probably got very little to say, that the story he'stellinghe is trying to isolate this moment of man's struggle in themost moving way he can. And he will try style. He'll try metaphor. He'll trysymbolism, to isolate that in the most moving way he can possiblydo it. So thein my opinion, the work itself creates its own style. That when it's done the writer can look back and say, "This is clumsy. I wish Icould think of a better way to do that." But he can't. He has done the best hecould with it. To get all he can into it. It'swell, he hasas we all do, an awareness of death, that he will not be hereforever, that the end can be for him tomorrow. He has beentroubled and moved so much by what he's seen of man's struggle that he wants toget that on paper, and he's afraid that if he puts it off, he will die before hedoes it. He, in effect, is like the man that's trying to carve the Lord's Prayeron the head of a pin. He's trying to put everything into one book, onepagethe perfect thing would be to put all that history and anguishinto one word, which you can't do. And the fumbling with style, with metaphor,symbolism, is simply his desperate, frantic attempt to get the beauty he has seenby simply being alive down on paper before hebefore the lightningstrikes. So he ishe mightthat's why he could hate hisstyle too, but this was the best he could do. That if he could do that overagain, he is convinced he could do it better. I think every writer believesthat, that if he could turn time back until this day last year that bookwould be a better book. Of course, it wouldn't be, but he believes that. Hecan't do it, so he writes another book tomorrow. But he wants to be as lucid, aspure as light or clear water itself. And when it gets moiled and turgid, he issorry. He grieves over that. Thoughof course, he don't have to readit anymore.That's oneadvantage Is writing a compulsion for you or could you stop [if you decided to]? Well, I would like to say, "Sure, I can take it or leave it," but Idon't believe that. I think that any writer isridden by a demon.That he really can't help himself.That he will keep onwriting as long as he lives. But hehe is not so conscious of beingdriven by a demon to no destination. He is convinced that he willwillmake the perfect work, so that as long as men live after him, theywill see that work as perfect and will remember him.That maybe what any artistis doing is simply writing "Kilroy was here" on the wall of the last oblivionbefore he passes through it and beyond it. Sir, as a southerner and a man who writes about the South, can you giveus your views of the Supreme Court decision? [audience murmur] That's sort of got out of fiction, hasn't it?I would say it was something thathad to come. There was athe dean of the law school atthe University of Mississippi said ten, twelve years ago that in time theSupreme Court wouldwould hand down that opinion. Nobody believed him.It'sit's our fault. If we hadhad given the Negro a chanceto find whether or not he can be equal, there wouldn't have been any need for it. Ithas set relations between the races back for some time, but it had to come. It'sour fault. [We could have prevented it.] [to create your characters]? May I have the first part of that again?? The writer ishas got to be born with curiosity about peoplemore than anything else. I thought at one time it took talent, but now I'm notso sure. I think he has got to have ruthlessness to destroy what is notabsolutely right, in his opinion. He's got to have industry to do it over andover again. He's got to have curiosity and insight. Curiosity and insight towonder why man does what he does. I think that hehedoesn't need experience, personal experience, to write about people. Personalexperienceas far as man goes, can come from the books he reads. Butcertainly the writer takes from every experience of any sort he'sever had. Hehe robs and steals from everything he's heard or seen orread. He's amoral, but he's perfectly willing for anyone after him to rob andsteal from him. He has the three, you might say, reservoirs that what he writescomes from. One is that experience. One is observation. The other isimagination. And nobody's to say just how much comes from what. But theimagination can carry the load. There was one blind man who was a pretty goodwriter. You don't have to really experience nor even read. You can listen, andthe imagination. You said the writer is somewhat unappreciated, amoral, after a fashion, and trying to capture a moment in the struggle of man, but at least I'min some of your worka literaryto say something more.I think especially of the story "The Bear," which I admire a great deal.The trappings of that storytrying to say something more,  I'm wonderingwhether despite the trappings  if you feel this is basically a Christian vision or a Christian viewpointthat you represent? I can't say. I think the writer is too busy writing about man in hisdilemma, his predicament. Of course, he writes out ofof thebackground, the reservoir, of his own culture, and naturally,ina Christian and a southern culture,thethe symbolism of Christianity and of the southernculture will appear. That is, anyany man is reallywritinghe's still writing his own biography. He doesn't needto hunt around forfor symbolism, any more than he needsto hunt around for a background from which toagainstwhich to see these imaginary people that he's trying to put down onpaper. That was something that he inherited, that he grew up with, that camefrom his heredity and from his environment. But the writer himselfis too busy telling about amazing, incalculable, marvelous man struggling withinthe dilemma of the human heart to bother too much about messages orsymbols, or   when you begin to write one of your books have you already predetermined what is going to happen or do you make up some of the details as you goalong? It begins with a seed. That seed could be anecdote. It could be asituation. It could be a character. Then you've got to explain how thatsituation came to be. You've got to explain where that character came from. Andthe first thing you know, you've got some more people in there explaining thesituation and the character. Then they all stand up andon their feetand begin to move, and all you've got to do is after that is to trot alongbehind them and put down what they do and say. That you canyou can invent the [finest,] mostwatertight plot you can think of. You get these people into it, and if they arehuman, unpredictable people, they won't care a hoot about that plot. They'll gooff and tell a story of their own. You can keep your plot. They don't wantit.  did you find Absalom, Absalom! a very difficult novel to write? Yes'm, itit was difficult. I worked on that nexthardest to The Sound and Fury, as I remember. Yes, Iworked on that for a year, and then put it away and wrote another book, and thenthe story still wouldn't let me aloneI came back to it. Yes, that wasvery difficult. There was a lot of rewriting in that.  I've heard it reported that you've said in the past thatSanctuary was written as a potboiler [Do you care to comment on this]? Yes, it was. I hadhad been writing as an amateur and having alot of fun at it. Then, all of a sudden, I found myself married, and I wouldneed a little money, and I thought I might write something to make a littlemoney with, so I thought of the most horrific story I could and wrote it.Sent it in to the publisher.He said, "Good Lord,man." This was nineteenin the nineteen twenties, when you couldn'tsay the sort of things in books you can now. He said, "If we print this, we'llboth be in jail." So he put it away, and I got a job and didn't need money toomuch. I wrote two more books, which were printed, and then one day I got thegalley for Sanctuary, and I read it, and it was so badbecause it was basely conceived that I wrote him and said that "we'll justburn this up and forget about it." He said, "Well, I have had plates[stamped] for it." I said, "Well, then I'll rewrite it." Hesaid, "That means that we have to make new plates. If you insist onrewriting, and if you will dig up $270, I will get the other $270, and we willmake new plates." So I paid my half of the new plates and rewrote the book tomake it at least honest. But I still don't like it because the whole conceptionwas base. It did sell, and was going to make me a lot of money. Thepublisher went bankrupt, so I got just exactly what I deserved, and I learned mylesson from it.Since then, I've remainedamateur. [ why did you go back to those same]characters in Requiem for a Nun?There was nothing wrong with the characters. Thetheconception of the first story was base because it was done not totell about man in his tragic struggle, but to make money. That's why it wasbase. But when I rewrote it, I'd already invested $270. In those days, I didn'thave $270 every day. Then I did the best I could to make an honestbook out of it. And the charactersthere was nothing wrong with thecharacters, just the concept of the book to begin with. Sir, in light of your friendship with Sherwood Anderson, are you, as awriter, indebted to him? Or what is your opinion of his place inAmerican literature? Hishe has never been given his rightful place in Americanliterature. In my opinion, he's the father ofof all of my generation:Hemingway, Erskine Caldwell, Thomas Wolfe, Dos Passos. Of course, Mark Twainis all of our grandfather. But Sherwood Anderson has, in myopinion, has still to receive his rightful place inin American letters.I know that this year's NobelPrize winner is a great admirer of yours, and I wonder if youcouldwhat is your impression or thoughts of Camus as a writer? Ifyou're acquainted with him, ? Yes, I know Camus best, and I think highest of him. Heis one man that hasis doing what I havetried always to do, which is to search, demand, ask alwaysofof one's own soul. That is my reason for saying that he is the bestof the living Frenchmen, better than Sartre or the others. Malraux wasahe became obsessed with politics. But Camus has stuck to hisprinciples, which was always to search the soul, which I think isthe writer's first job. To search his own soul, to give a proper moving pictureof man inin the human dilemma. Have you ever tried to write a novelin a northern atmosphere? No, I haven't. I reckon I stick to Mississippi because I'm too lazy todo research.As long as I stickto what I knowdialect, habits, customs,folklorethat I know, then nobody can check me on them, and say, "Uh uh,you're wrong there. This is the way they do it in New Hampshire."But people areare the same. There'stoo little difference. And I think when a man or woman writes about his owncountry, he's not regional, he's just too lazy to want to do anyresearch. How have you enjoyed your stay here in Virginia? And do you thinkVirginia as an area is [conducive] as Yoknapatawpha county? Well, I have been in Albemarle County off and on for two or three yearsnow, and I have seen a few Snopeses there.ButI like Virginia and Virginians. The longer I stay in Albemarle County, the morelike Mississippians they behave, but they don't have some of theMississippi vices. I haveI said last year that I like Virginians because they were snobs, and since they seem to think I'm all right, thenmaybe I am all right.  Are the Snopeses really taking over Jefferson, and is there anygroup that might hold them out? The Snopeses will destroy themselves. I really can't afford to answerthat question, sir, becauseyou might not buythe next book if I do. They werethat's the artist's prerogative, Ithink, is to emphasize, to underline, toto blow upfacts, distort facts in order to state a truth. Thethere's probablyno tribe of Snopeses in Mississippi or anywhere else outside of my ownapocrypha. They were simply an invention of mine to tell a story ofman in his struggle. That I was not trying to say, "This is the sort of folks weraise in my part of Mississippi," at all. That they were simply over-emphasized,burlesqued if you like, which is what Mr. Dickens spent a lot of his time doing,for a valid, to him and to me, reason, which was to tell a story ina moving, dramatic, tragic, or comical way. What is your opinion of Henry Miller? Sorry, I don't know him. Should I?Youmust believe me. I do live in the country, and I don't keep up with literarythings. I ain't a literary man. So if I should know Henry Miller, I will findout about it.  Along those lines, do you think that the new American literature will develop,what will it have to say, [or is there nothing left] ? It will have to say the same things that people have had to say and havebeen saying ever since man first found some way to paint pictureson the walls of the cave. It's to tell about the eternal problemsof man's heart, which have nothing to do with atom bombs nornor laborunions, nor the price of motor cars, nor segregation, nor integration. It's manstruggling with the eternal verities ofof the soul. The young writertoday, as I said, has got to resist that pressure to belong togroups, to relinquish his capacity to think and judge intothe mouth of a committee chairman. But he will write about thesame passions and hopes and aspirations and griefs that people have writtenabout ever since whoever wrote the Old Testament. His problemwhat towrite about is there. He doesn't need . Would you say that the Snopeses are capable or incapable of[participating in]? The ones which are incapable of it willwill be obliterated.The Snopes will evolve intoyou might say, an acceptable type of Snopes. Either that or he'll have to vanish. Thathe will have to cope with his environment or his environment will destroyhim. You keep referring to the tragic struggle.Sir, I wonder ifyou the artist's chief talent is toin his ability to perceive this struggle or in his ability to put downthe struggle once he's perceived it ? To perceive it, maybe to sympathize with it. Not to judge it, but simplyto sympathize with it, to pity it. If he perceives it and anguishes enough overit, he will put it down. He may not be able to spell nor punctuate either, butsomebody in the publisher's office will do that for him. He will put it down ifhe perceives it and anguishes over it, hates it or admires it or is troubled byit, then he will put it down. That will just take industry to work at it,ruthlessness to throw away what is not quite good, to keep at it. Sir, you mentioned Thomas Wolfe [as being of your generation.Would you comment on his place in American]? It's too soon to say, I think. It takestakes alittle time before the dross evaporates from anyone's work, untilthere's a distance for a true perspective. At one time, I was askedtowhat I thought of my contemporaries. I said, "It's too soon totell." The questioner said, "Well, haven't you got any opinion of them at all."I said, "Opinion of who?" He named Wolfe, Hemingway, Dos Passos,Caldwell, and me. I rated them then Wolfe first, me second, Dos Passos,Caldwell, and Hemingway.Not ononwhat we'd accomplished, but only on the single general ground I could find,which was the attempt to do more than we could do, on the failure.I rated Wolfe because his was the most splendid failure. He had tried hardest totake all the experience that he was capable of observing and imagining and putit down in one book, on the head of a pin. He had the courage to experiment, tobeto write nonsense, to be foolish, to be sentimental, in the attemptto get down thethat single moving and passionate instance of man'sstruggle. I rated myself next because I had tried next hardest to get everythingon one page. I rated the others down to Hemingway, not on the value of his work,which I thought was, per se, the best because it was intact and complete. Buthis wasshowed less desire to try to get all of man's heart onto thepinhead. So I think it's too soon for anyone to have ahave an opinionabout Wolfe. Maybe the only opinion to have about anybody is, "Do I like to readhim or don't I?" And if I like to read him, he's all right. If I don't like toread him, then he may be all right for somebody else, but he ain't my cup oftea. [I think wehave]We certainly owe Mr. Faulkner our gratitude.We certainly appreciate his good nature, his stamina, and I know we want to thank him for a really memorable occasion.It's with pleasure that I make thisintroduction today because it's always a pleasure for me to introduce and forall of us to hear our speaker, but it's with regret, too, because this is ourlast session today. It's our last session with the world's greatest livingnovelist and with our own Writer-in-Residence, who today will read from the bookhe has referred to as his favorite, The Sound and theFury. He'll read from Dilsey's section, and at the conclusion of hisreading, he will answer such questions as you care to put to him. I'll resist atthis time all temptations to quote lines of poetry, to say aveatque vale or anything of that sort, because we hope to see him againand again in Charlottesville in the years to come. Mr. William Faulkner. Since this is my last day here in mysojourn as Writer-in-Residence, I could use this last hour to try to say thankyou to the people of Albemarle County and Charlottesville and the University formaking my stay here this pleasant and this happy. I won't do that. I won't evensay goodbye. Every individual is the sum total of his past, so when I leavehere, I will leave something of Faulkner in Albemarle County, where Faulkner washappy. When I go away, I will take with me something ofAlbemarle County. I will always come back so that those two separates can bejoined again. I won't need to say goodbye. And each time I come back, I'll besaying, "Much obliged." The road rose again, to a scene like a painted backdrop.Notched into a cut of red clay crowned with oaks the road appeared to stopshort off, like a cut ribbon. Beside it a weathered church lifted its crazysteeple like a painted church, and the whole scene was as flat and withoutperspective as a painted cardboard set upon the ultimate edge of the flatearth, against the windy sunlight of space and April and a midmorning filledwith bells. Toward the church they thronged with slow sabbath deliberation,the women and children went on in, the men stopped outside and talked inquiet groups until the bell ceased ringing. Then they too entered.Thechurch had been decorated, with sparse flowers from kitchen gardens andhedgerows, and with streamers of colored crepe paper. Above the pulpit hunga battered Christmas bell, the accordion sort that collapses. The pulpit wasempty, though the choir was already in place, fanning themselves although itwas not warm. Most of the women were gathered on one side of the room.They were talking. Then the bell struck one time and they dispersed to theirseats and the congregation sat for an instant, expectant. The bell struckagain one time. The choir rose and began to sing and the congregation turnedits head as one as six small childrenfour girls with tightpigtails bound with small scraps of cloth like butterflies, and two boyswith close napped headsentered and marched up the aisle, strungtogether in a harness of white ribbons and flowers, and followed by two menin single file. The second man was huge, of a light coffee color, imposingin a frock coat and white tie. His head was magisterial and profound, hisneck rolled above his collar in rich folds. But he was familiar to them, andso the heads were still reverted when he had passed, and it was not untilthe choir ceased singing that they realised that the visiting clergyman hadalready entered, and when they saw the man whowho had preceded their ministerenter the pulpit still ahead of him an indescribable sound went up, a sigh,a sound of astonishment and disappointment. The visitor was undersized, in a shabby alpaca coat. Hehad a wizened black face like a small, aged monkey. And all the while thatthe choir sang again and while the six children rose and sang in thin,frightened, tuneless whispers, they watched the insignificant looking mansitting dwarfed and countrified by the minister's imposing bulk, withsomething like consternation. They were still looking at him withconsternation and unbelief when the minister rose and introduced him inrich, rolling tones whose very unction served to increaseincrease the visitor'sinsignificance."En dey brung dat all de way fum Saint Looey," Fronywhispered."I've knowed de Lawd to use cuiser tools den dat," Dilseysaid. "Hush, now," she said to Ben. "Dey fixin to sing again in aminute." When the visitor rose to speak he sounded like a whiteman. His voice was level and cold. It sounded too big to have come from himand they listened at first through with curiosity, as they would have to a monkeytalking. They began to watch him as they would a man on a tight rope. Theyeven forgot his insignificant appearance in the virtuosity with which he ranand poised and swooped upon the cold inflectionless wire of his voice, sothat at last, when with a sort of swooping glide he came to rest againbeside the reading desk with one arm resting upon it at shoulder height andhis monkey body as reft of all motion as a mummy or an emptied vessel, thecongregation sighed as if it waked from a collective dream and moved alittle in its seats. Behind the pulpit the choir fanned steadily. Dilseywhispered, "Hush, now. Dey fixin to sing in a minute." Then a voice said, "Brethren."The preacher had notmoved. His arm lay yet across the desk, and he still held that pose whilethe voice died in sonorous echoes between the walls. It was as different asday and dark from his former tone, with a sad, timbrous quality like an altohorn, sinking into their hearts and speaking there again when it had ceasedin fading and cumulate echoes."Brethren and sisteren," it said again.The preacher removed his arm and he began to walk back and forth before thedesk, his hands clasped behind him, a meagre figure, hunched over uponitself like that of one long immured in striving with the implacable earth,"I got the recollection and the blood of the Lamb!" He tramped steadily backand forth beneath the twisted paper and the Christmas bell, hunched, hishands clasped behind him. He was like a worn small rock whelmed by thesuccessive waves of his voice. With his body he seemed to feed that voicethat, succubus like, had fleshed its teeth in him. And the congregationseemed to watch with its own eyes while the voice consumed him, until he wasnothing and they were nothing and there was not even a voice but insteadtheir hearts were speaking to one another in chanting measures beyond theneed for words, so that when he came to rest again against the reading desk, hismonkey face lifted and his whole attitude that of a serene, torturedcrucifix that transcended its shabbiness and insignificance and made it ofno moment, a long moaning expulsion of breath rose from them, and a woman'swoman'ssingle soprano: "Yes, Jesus!" As the scudding day passed overhead the dingy windowsglowed and faded in ghostly retrograde. A car passed along the road outside,laboring in the sand, died away. Dilsey sat bolt upright, her hand on Ben'sknee. Two tears slid down her fallen cheeks, in and out of the myriadcoruscations of immolation and abnegation and time."Brethren," theminister said in a harsh whisper, without moving."Yes, Jesus!" thewoman's voice said, hushed yet."Breddren en sistuhn!" His voice rangagain, with the horns. He moved his arm and stood erect and raised hishands. "I got de ricklickshun en de blood of de Lamb!" They did not markjust when his intonation, his pronunciation, became negroid, they just satswaying a little in their seats as the voice took them into itself."When de long, coldOh, I tells you, breddren, when de long, cold.. . . I sees de light en I sees de word, po sinner! Dey passed away inEgypt, de swingin chariots; de generations passed away. Wus a rich man: wharhe now, O breddren? Wus a po man: whar he now, O sistuhn? Oh I tells you, efyou aint got de milk en de dew of de old salvation when de long, cold yearsrolls away!""Yes, Jesus!" "I tells you, breddren, en I tells you, sistuhn, dey'llcome a time. Po sinner sayin Let me lay down wid de Lawd, lemme lay down myload. Den whut Jesus gwine say, O breddren? O sistuhn? Is you got dericklickshun en de Blood of de Lamb? Case I aint gwine load downheaven!"He fumbled in his coat and took out a handkerchief and moppedhis face. A low concerted sound rose from the congregation: "Mmmmmmmmmmmmm!"The woman's voice said, "Yes, Jesus! Jesus!""Breddren! Look at demdem little chillen settin dar. Jesus wus like dat once. He mammy suffered deglory en de pangs. Sometime maybe she helt him at de nightfall, whilst deangels singin him to sleep; maybe she look out de do en see de Roman po-licepassin." He tramped back and forth, mopping his face. "Listen, breddren! Isees de day. Ma'y settin in de do wid Jesus on her lap, de little Jesus.Like dem chillen dar, de little Jesus. I hears de angels singin de peacefulsongs en de glory; I sees de closin eyes; sees Mary jump up, sees de sojerface: We gwine to kill! We gwine to kill! We gwine to kill yo little Jesus!I hears de weepin en de lamentation of de po mammy widout de salvation en deword of God!" "Yes Jesus! Little Jesus!" and anothervoice, rising:"I sees, O Jesus! Oh I sees!" and still another, withoutwords, like bubbles rising in water."I sees hit, breddren! I sees hit!Sees de blastin, blindin sight! I sees Calvary, wid de sacred trees, sees dethief en de murderer en de least of dese; I hears de boastin en de braggin:Ef you be Jesus, lif up yo tree en walk! I hears de wailin of women en deevenin lamentations; I hears de weepin en de cryin en de turned-away face ofGod: dey done kilt Jesus; dey done kilt my Son!""Jesus! I sees, O Jesus!""O blind sinner! Breddren, I tells you; sistuhn, Isays to you, when de Lawd did turn His mighty face, say, Aint gwine overloadheaven! I can see de widowed God shet His do; I sees de whelmin flood rollbetween; I sees de darkness en de death everlastin upon de generations. Den,lo! Breddren! Yes, breddren! Whut I see? Whut I see, O sinner? I sees deresurrection en de light; sees de meek Jesus sayin Dey kilt me dat ye shalllive again; I died dat dem whut sees en believes shall never die. Breddren,O breddren! I sees de doom crack en hears de golden horns shoutin down de glory,en de arisen dead whut got de blood en de ricklickshun of de Lamb!"Inthe midst of the voices and the hands Ben sat, rapt in his sweet blue gaze.Dilsey sat bolt upright beside, crying rigidly and quietly in the annealmentand the blood of the remembered Lamb. As they walked through the bright noon, up the sandyroad with the dispersing congregation talking easily again group to group,she continued to weep, unmindful of the talk."He sho a preacher, mon! He didn't look like much at first, but hush!""He seed de power en deglory.""Yes, suh. He seed hit. Face to face he seed hit."Dilseymade no sound, her face did not quiver as the tears took their sunken anddevious courses, walking with her head up, making no effort to dry them awayeven."Whyn't you quit dat, mammy?" Frony said. "Wid all dese peoplelookin. We be passin white folks soon.""I've seed de first en delast," Dilsey said. "Never you mind me.""First en de last whut?" Fronysaid."Never you mind," Dilsey said. "I seed de beginnin, en now I seesde endin." Any question, from anyone?Mr. Faulkner? Do you think that there's aparticular order in which your works should be read ? Many people haveoffered a sequence. Do you think there's a particular sequence that your booksshould be read in? Probably to begin with a book called Sartoris. That has the germ of my apocrypha in it. A lot of the characters are postulatedin that book. I'd say that's a good one to begin with.Is the present movie a compilationof various episodes in different novels? For inI'm thinking of the horse particularly.Did that come from the "Spotted Horses," that's so much likeit? I don't know, ma'am, because I'm not a moving picture-goer. I haven'tseen [the movie].Ireally don't know. My experience with moving pictures is that they have almostany reason for buying the book except to make it.I remember M-G-M bought a book of mine called The Unvanquished. They were stories of the Civil War. Ifound out later that a producer named Selznick had bought GoneWith the Wind, and he wanted to use Clark Gable in the picture, butClark Gable belonged to M-G-M, and M-G-M wouldn't let Mr. Selznick have ClarkGable unless Mr. Selznick let M-G-M make the picture, which Mr. Selznickwouldn't do, so M-G-M hunted around for another book to buy of the Civil War totell Mr. Selznick they were going to make a GoneWith theWind themselves if he didn't let them make his, so they bought my bookwith no intention of making it.  I just wanted to ask you[out of your answer]during the previous year, it came out that you don't take full responsibility for yourcharacters. As if the created art with you was something unconscious, not a willful act? I didn't make that statement clear. What I said was that I'm notresponsible for the ideas and opinions that my characters express.  I assume responsibility for the people, but theyhave their own ideas and opinions that I don't always agree with.  What is the reason that this book from which you read is your favorite[novel]? I think that no writer is ever quite satisfiedwithwith the book. That's why he writes another one. That he istrying to put on paper something that is going to be a little better thananybody else has put on paper up to date, and this is my favorite one because Iworked the hardest on it, not to accomplish what I hoped to do with it, but Ianguished andand raged over it more than over any other to try tomake something out of it, that it was impossible forfor me to do.It's the same feeling that the parent may have toward theincorrigible or the abnormal child, maybe.Has Requiem for a Nun ever been acted on the stage?It's been knocking around Europe for the last six or sevenyears. It has been in every language until last fall it was three weeks at theCourt Theater in London. It will be inin New York this fall.  I have been trying to trace a tradition in your work, andI'm curious to know whether you read Sir Walter Scott to any extent in the timeprevious to writing your novels. Yes'm, I did. I read everything I could get my hands on without anydiscretion or judgment at one time,and I'msure that everything I've read from the telephone book up has influenced whatI've done since.I think that's true of anywriter. Your books have been compared to Bach's fugues. Do youobjectively plan out that they're going to have thateffect or does it just come naturally? Well, it'sit's not quite planned because probably I am notcapable of that, but I think that there's too much work goes intoany book to call it a natural process.But asabout reading, anyexperience the writer has ever suffered is going to influence what he does, andthat is not only what he's read, but the music he's heard, the pictures he'sseen, and it wasn't that I went to Bach to get myself out ofaa jam in the work, but probably what I had heard ofBachat the moment when I needed to use counterpoint, there it was. How do you arrive at names for your characters? The only rule is to do the best you can not to use the name ofof anyliving person because you'll spend the next ten or fifteen dollars in stampsexplaining that you didn't mean so and so. Characters quite often name themselves just like the story itself will selectits own title. Some people, to me, look and behave just like their names. Butthat is, I don't remember that I ever any trouble trying to get a name for acharacter. I never had to look through city directories for names.Thethe people themselves said, "I'm going to be named so and so." What is the immediate stimulus that makes you write? Oh, it's a demon.I don't know whereit came from. I think every artist has got one.Do you thinkwhat I'm trying . . Do youdo you think before you write or do you write  Well, I'm glad you stopped there. Thank you.DidI think I know what you mean by thestimulus. It'syou're alive in the world. You see man. You have aninsatiable curiosity about him, but more than that you have an admiration forhim. He is frail and fragile, a web of flesh and bone and mostly water. He'sflung willy nilly into a ramshackle universe stuck together with electricity. The problems he faces are always a littlebigger than he is, and yet, amazingly enough, he copes with them, notindividually butbut as a race. He endures. He's outlasted dinosaurs.He's outlasted atom bombs. He'll outlast communism. Simply because there's somepart in him that keeps him from ever knowing that he'swhipped, I suppose. That as frail as he is, hehe lives up to hiscodes of behavior. He shows compassion when there's no reason why he should.He's braver than he should be. He's more honest. The writer is sointerested, he sees this as so amazing andand you might say sobeautiful. Anyway, itit's so moving to him that he wants to put itdown on paper or in music or on canvas, that he simply wants to isolate one ofthese instances in which manfrail, foolish manhas actedmiles above his head in some amusing or dramatic or tragic way. Anyway, somegallant way. That, I suppose, is the incentive to write, apart from it beingfun. I sort of believe that is the reason that people areartists. It'sit's the most satisfying occupation man has discoveredyet, because you never can quite do it as well as you want to, so there's alwayssomething to wake up tomorrow morning to do. You're never bored. You never reachsatiation.Sir, are there particular reasonswhy you do not go to the movies? They come at the wrong time of day.That's the time of day I like to have two orthree drinks and eat supper and then sit down and smoke and read. Iftheif they had moving pictureswell, I don't know, I'd havesomething else better to do any time of day.Ithink maybe I'd rather read it than listen to it. I'd rather read Shakespearethan see his plays.Would that apply to drama, too?I can count on my thumbs the plays I've seen in mylife,and that'sone is Ben Hur. The other iswas East Lynne. I reckon I was eight, nine years old. Iremember Ben Hur because it had live horses [init] and a camel. I'd never seen a camel before.   are there things you can know about the world thatscientists can't, you as an artist? No, I think that the sort of facts a scientist knows no artist is really interested in. That his interest is in thesimple, eternal, fundamental truths of man's behavior, not the factsofof his behavior nor the facts he lives among.That the writer ishas no concern withfacts. He's a congenital liar to begin with. That's why they call it fiction. That he makes his own facts just to suitwhatever phase ofof the eternal truth he is trying to makedramatic.Have you ever been called ahumorist? I think some of the things I write is funny.I don't know .Sir, how do youhow do youorganize youryour novels? Do you have any outline or do you just begin writing it? There's no rules for that. Occasionally, one is completebefore you begin it, which is tour de force, but most of them begin with someincident in which man is acting in that gallant way despite his fragility.Others begin with a character who has in himself the seed of tragedy. Afterthat, theall the writer has to do is to run along behind with anotebook and put down what they say and do. They've taken charge bythenby then.  Why, if you will agree that the writer is never quite satisfiedwithwith anything he does, then none of them are difficult or none ofthem are easy.That emotionthe emotion the character shows is simplyone of the tools in the craftsman's toolbox, and when he needs toshow anger, he can always steal from somebody else that has shown anger and copyit. If he believes in his characters enough, and they themselves have stood upon their own hind legs and begun to move, then all he has to do is just put downwhat they say and do, that he doesn't haveto create emotional states for them. They're doing that. He just isthe stenographer.  [go back,]. I'm going to say the sentence structure isdifferent in the later books than in the earlier ones. Is that by intention orjust an evolution in style? I prefer to think that no writer has got time to be tooconcerned with style, that he is simply telling this dramatic instance in themost effective way he knows, that the book, the story, creates its own style.Long and involved sentencesI don't like them anyany morethan the people that have to read them do, but I couldn't think of any, to me,better, more effective, way to tell what I was trying to tell.And it's notreally an evolution, simply that one story in my opiniondemanded, compelled a certain diction and style. The story next to it hascompelled a completely different one.Going back to the movies, do you mind that they buy your movie and thentreat it in an entirely different way from the way you would want it to betreated? Well, I wouldn't have any wants in the matter. I have done the best Icould with that book myself. It wasn't quite as good as I thought it was goingto be, and I'm convinced that nobody can else improve on it,and every now and then I like a little moneymyself,and so they are welcome to do whateverthey want to because they can't really think of that book as I wrote it. It occurs to me that as Writer-in-Residence we are making you lookforbackwards instead of forwards. We are making you analyze whatyou've already done. Has this affected your writing career? I think as long as the demon's on my back, nothing can affect my writingcareer. I think that itit pleases anyone to find thatthere are enough people who are moved or entertained by what he did to wherethey willwill come in a group like this asking questions. It may bethat that's a poor habit for anan aged writer like me to form, thathe will get to where he'd rather talk to folks than to go home and work.In that way, it may damage his work a little, butI suspect that when the writer's young and still hot, he's notgoing to become Writer-in-Residence, [anyway]. He's too busy.That when he begins to scrape the bottom of the barrel, then he canbecome a philosopher and a sage,but you woulddoyou prefer to create a mood rather than a plot when writing? I am simply writing about people. I have taken man in one of his amazingvictories and have tried to put it down on paper. If it takes plot to do that,then I willwill borrow a plot from somebody. There ain't but two orthree plots, you know.Ifif ittakes a mood, then I will hunt around to where somebody's written thesortin memory, I meanwhere somebody has portrayed thatmood, and I will borrow from him.[Then] you are writing an emotion, not? I'm writing about people. Man involved in the human dilemma, facing theproblems bigger than he, whether he licks them or whether they lick him.But manas frail and fragile as he is, yet he will keep on trying to be brave and honestand compassionate, and that, to me, is very fine and very interesting, and thatis the reason I think any writer writes. He's not trying to write[style]. He's not trying to uplift, to delivera message. He is simply writing about a man in the infinite mutations ofof man's capacity.  I don't know that book. I read a story thatwas inside the story ofof a man named Cass [something].That was the best part of that book. As far as I'm concerned, he can throw therest of the book away, but that is a very fine story. So I can't speak aboutthat book. I didn't read it withwith enough attentionto remember it, only that story of the man Cass, Ibelieve. do the critics botheryou in any way or change the tenor or direction of your thinking or actions? I don't read critics. I'd rather read imaginary fiction.I'm not a Dr. Bowers, I think you saystated or one of you gentlemen stated that Mr. Faulkner didn't particularly care to discussliterature at any time in more-or-less of a social atmosphere. What was his favorite topic of discussion at that time?Dr. Bowers, you mentioned thatyou pointed out that Mr. Faulkner was a little hesitant in speaking before audiences. Was heby nature a shy man or did he ever give any explanation for not appearing to want to appear before audiences?The breadth of some of his interest, I think, iscould be shown by his conversations with Mr. Colvert about airplanes. Ijust want to throw in a special question you might want to ask because I think it's unusualask what he talked to you about.Yeah. What did he used to talk to you about?Did he keep up with modern-day aircraft at all. I mean, did he discuss this with you?What was his feeling about the community of Charlottesville in itself, StoStovall?Did he ever express specifically a philosophy of life?Mr. Faulkner will answer questions . We will have a number of themon "Was," preferably. Sir, a fyce plays a minor part in "Was" and in a few more of yourstories, I believe. Well, is a fyce just a mongrel or is he anout-of-the-ordinary mongrel that you might equate with the primitive? He isin our Mississippi jargon, he is any small dog, usuallyhe was a fox or rat terrier at one time that has gotten mixed up with hound,with bird-dog, everything else, but any small dog in my country is called afyce.Can we look upon him as representing the primitive, such as the bear andthe forest? No, he's thein a way, thethe antithesis of the bear. The bearrepresented the obsolete primitive. The fyce represents the creature who hascoped with environment and is still on top of it, you might say. That hehasinstead of sticking to his breeding andand becoming a decadent,degenerate creature, he has mixed himself up with the good stock where he pickedand chose. And he's quite smart.He's quite brave. All's against him is hissize. But I never knew a fyce yet that realized that he wasn't as big asanything else he ever saw, even a bear.  Yes sir. into what strata would these people fitMr.Hubert and Miss Sophonsiba ? They were the aristocracy of provincial Mississippi at that time. It wasstill frontier. In Natchez they had the fine Empire furniture. Peoplehadthey spent their money on objets-d'art fromEurope, furnishings and fine clothes. Inin the country, these people, they werearistocracy, but they were still frontier, they were still the tall man with thelong rifle, in a way. That even their splendor was a little on the slovenlyside, that they went through the motions ofof living like dukes and princes buttheir life wasn't too different from the man who lived in a mud-floored hovel.No, they represented the aristocracy.They were the wealthy, the men of power,the owners of slaves.  Could you explain the significance of the title "Was"? Yes, I wasthis was the first chapter in a book. The book wascomposed of short stories. It covered a great deal of time. The centralcharacter in the book was a man named Isac McCaslin, who was old at the time ofthe book. But this background which produced Isac McCaslin had to be told bysomebody, and so this is Isac McCaslin's uncle.This Cass here is not old Ike,this is Ike's uncle. And "Was" simply because Ike is saying to the reader, "I'mnot telling this, this was my uncle, my great-uncle that told it." That's theonly reason for "Was," that this was the old time. But it's part ofhim, too. Sir, does the presentation of the ribbon to Uncle Buddy have anysignificance from medieval tales or anything? Yes, that was Miss Sophonsiba with that belief of hers and her brothertoo that they were the rightful heirs to[to die forhis choice]. Sir, do you look at your humor as awith the same inspirationas you do a serious thing, or is it more a relaxing kind of work? No, no, it's a part of man, too.It's a part of life. That peoplearethere's not too fine a distinction between humor and tragedy, thateven tragedy is in a way walking a tightrope between theridiculousbetween the bizarre and theand the terrible. Thatit'spossibly the writer uses humor as a tool, that he's still tryingto write about people, to write about man, about the human heart in some movingway, and so he uses whatever tool that he thinks will do most to finish the picture which at the moment he ishe is trying to paint, of man. That he will usehumor, tragedy, just as he uses violence. They are tools, but an ineradicablepart of life, humor is. Yes sir.What is the significance of the title "Red Leaves"? Well, that was probably symbolism. Thethe red leaves referred to theIndian. It was the deciduation of nature which no one could stop that hadsuffocated, smothered, destroyed the Negro. That the red leaves had nothingagainst him when they suffocated and destroyed him. They had nothing againsthim.They probably liked him, but it was normal deciduation which the redleaves, whether they regretted it or not, had nothing more to say in. Yes sir.Sir, you use hunting terms all through "Was" when they're chasing Tomey'sTurl. Is there any significance to thisI mean, do they think thatperhaps this colored man is not aboutwell, say he's on the same planeas the fox? At thatat that time he was, at the very time that these twin brothers had believedthat there was something outrageous and wrong in slavery, and they had done whatthey could. In fact, they hadhad given up their father's fine mansion to let theslaves live in it and they had built a two-room log cabin that they lived in.That they by instinct knew that slavery was wrong, but they didn't know quitewhat to do about it. And in the heat ofof the pursuitof, well, ininin dailylife, they would use the terms in which the Negro was on a level with the dog orthe animal they ran. And especially in the heat of a race,whichthoughthough this was more ofof deadly purpose than simple pleasure,in the heat of runningrunning this man, the man became quarry that would have receivedthe same respect that the bear or the deer wouldthat is, the bear orthe deer would havehis chance for his life. They wouldn't have betrayedhim, tricked him.They wouldn't have built a deadfall for him. They would haverun him all fair with the dogs and if he could escape, could kill the dogs andget away, good for him. If he couldn't, it was too bad.Sir, never having been fox-hunting, what do you mean by "going to earth,"as far as Tomey's Turl was concerned? That's when the quarry finds a hole in the ground, a den, and runs intoit. The fox before the dogs, he will try first to trick the dogs, and if hecan't, then he gets into something that the dogs can't follow him into. Hegoesfinds an old fox den or something that he knows, that the dog istoo big to follow, he gets in there, he's gone to earth. Sir, did Tomey's Turl stack the deck? And if so  Oh yes, because he wanted Tennie, and he wanted to go back home and takeTennie with him.Well, I understood that in the last thing it says that if heifMr. Hubert didn't call Uncle Buddy, then everything would stay just the way itwas, and that Tomey's Turl would go back with Uncle Buddy and Uncle Buck andthat Tennie would stay with Mr. Hubert and leave it just the way it wasbefore. No, no, if Uncle Buddy saved Uncle Buck from Miss Sophonsiba, then UncleBuddy would have to buy Tennie. That was the way the bet was settled, and soTomey's Turl, he didn't care whether Uncle Buck was safe from Miss Sophonsiba ornot, but he wanted Tennie to go back home with him, and so hehe hunted around,found that last deuce for Uncle Buddy. He was playing for Tennie. Uncle Buddywas playing for his brother, to save his brother. Their aims were the same,though the end was slightly different. Sir, in another one of your stories, "Percy Grimm," do you think that thetype of person that is exemplified there is prevalent in the South today,perhaps in the White Citizens Councils? I wouldn't say prevalent. He exists everywhere. I wrote that book in1932, before I'd ever heard of Hitler's Storm Troopers.What he was was a NaziStorm Trooper, but then I'd never heard of one then, and he's not prevalent, buthe's everywhere. I wouldn't say that there are more of him in the South, but Iwould say that there are probably more of him in the White Citizens Council thananywhere else in the South, but I think you find him everywhere, in allcountries, in all people. Sir, was Percy Grimm ever punished for his crime? I think in time that every Storm Trooper suffers for it. He don't suffer anyretribution, any stroke of lightning from the gods, but he's got to live withhimself, and there comes a time when you've got to live with that, when you'retoo old and thethe fire which enables you to get a certain amount of hystericaladrenalic pleasure out of things like that is gone, andand all you have left is toremember what you did, and you probably wonder why in God's name you did thingslike that, and you have to live with it. And I think that quite oftenunexplained suicides go back to some man who has done something like that, and hegets old, and he's got to live with it, and decides it's not worth living withit. You spoke a little while ago of Greek themes. I was wondering if youthink that modern literature or twentieth-century literature, so to speak, couldfeature the truly tragic hero that you would find in Greek times, or do youthink the characters should be meaner or more simple?  That's a difficult question to answer. I think the writer has got towrite in terms of his environment, and his environment consists not only inin theimmediate scene, but his readers are part of that environment too, and maybenobody cancan write forever without expecting to be read, and probably a writer,whether he intends to or not, or knows it or not, is going to shape what hewrites inin the terms ofof who will read it. Soso maybe when there are fine listeners,there will be fine poets again, that maybe the writing that is not too good isnot just the writer's fault, it may be because of the environment, a part ofwhich is the general effluvium ofof the readers, the people who will read it, thatdoes something to the air they all breathe together, that compels the shape ofthe book. It would be fine if people could write inin the old, simple, clearHellenic tradition, but then maybe that would be now obsolete, that there was atime for that, the time for that is not now.It may come back, if life does goin cycles. Sir, in your excerpt from The Unvanquished, "AnOdor of Verbena," why is that sprig of verbena left on Bayard's pillow right atthe very end, when she leaves, she says she's going to abjure verbena for everand ever, and then he goes off, he walks into town, and he meets Mr. Redmond, Ibelieve it is, and then without any gun or anything, and then comes back, andthe sprig of verbena is left on his pillow. Thatofof course, the verbena was associated with Drusilla, withthat woman, and she had wanted him to take a pistol andand avenge his father'sdeath. Hehe went to the man who had shot his father, unarmed, and instead ofkilling the man, by that gesture he drove the man out of town, and although thathadhad violated Drusilla's traditions of an eye for an eye, shethespring of verbena meant that she realized that that took courage too and maybemore moral courage than to have drawn blood, or to have taken another step in anendless feud of an eye for an eye.But then why did she leave? Because she was at that time too old, she was still too involved in itto accept that morally. I mean accept it physically, that her husband had notbeenbeen avenged by his own son. That is, her intellect saidsaid, "This was a bravething," but the Eve in her said, "My husband, my lover has not been avenged."Andshe could say, "You were brave," but she"this is not for me, thatIthat sort of bravery is not for me." Sir, is there any reason for the Southernthe blossoming ofSouthern writing, that is, are there any circumstances in the Southernenvironment that would bring about the blossoming of great writers as ithas? I don't know. That's a literary question.And I wouldn't undertake toanswer it. I might say that when that so-called blossoming of Southern writerscame along, it was at a time when nobody in the South had much money.Theycouldn't travel, and they had to invent a world a little different from theshabby one they lived in, so they took to writing, which is cheaperthan athat is a ream of paper and a pencil is cheaper than a railroadticket.  Sir, why, in the beginning of your book aboutyou mentionIkkemotubbe, why does Ikkemotubbe cease to own the land as soon as he realizesthat it is saleable, and do the people like the Compsons who have bought theland, do they ever belong to the land in the sense that Ikkemotubbe previouslyhad? No, I don't think they do. I think the ghost ofof that ravishmentlingers in the land, that the land is inimical to the white man because of theunjust way in which it was taken from Ikkemotubbe and his people. That happenedby treaty, which President Jackson established with the Chickasaws and theChoctaws, in which they would take land in Oklahoma in exchange for theirMississippi land. And they were paid for it, but they were compelled to leaveit, either to leave onto follow a chimera in the West or to staythere in a condition even worse than the Negro slave, in isolation. There are afew of them still in Mississippi, but they fair a good deal like animals in azoo: they have nono place in the culture, in the economy, unless they become whitemen, and they have in some cases mixed with white people, and their ownconditions have vanished, or they have mixed with Negroes, and they have descendedinto the Negroes' condition of semi-peonage.And even the aristocracy, the original aristocracy was tainted. Theynever owned the land. The land was never theirs. That's right. Theythe Indians held the land communally, a few of them thatwere wise enough to see which way the wind was blowing would get governmentpatents for the land. There was one of them, a Choctaw chief, was one of thewealthiest men in Mississippi, Greenwood Leflore.He was wise enough to get apatented deed to his land and to take up the white man's ways. He was a cottonplanter. He built a tremendous mansion and imported the furnishings fromFrance, and he was quite wealthy. And then when in '61, he declined to accept theConfederacy, and Confederate troops were sent in there and hishis stables wereset on fire, the story is that whenwhen they demanded that he accept an oath to theConfederacy, he went into the house and got a United States flag and wrapped itaround himself, andand came out and walked into that burning barn and died there,but that'swe don't know whether that's so or not, but that's thelegend. But the house is still there. It's a museum now, andand his descendants,they are two great-great-nieces. They're mostly white now. They own theplace.I want to thank you on behalf of me and the class members.[We meet in this room on Mondayand Wednesday.] Thank you. This question is about Light in August. Could youtell me your purpose in placing the chapter about Hightower's early life in theend of the novel rather than when Hightower first appeared? It may be this. Unless a book follows a simple direct linesuch as a story ofof adventure, it becomes a series of pieces. It's a good deallikelike dressing a showcase window. It takes a certain amountofof judgment andand taste to arrange the different pieces in the mosteffective place in juxtaposition to one another. That was the reason. It seemedto me that was the most effective place to put that to underlinethe tragedy of Christmas's story by the tragedy ofofhis antithesis. A man whoHightower was a man whowho wantedto be better than he was afraid he would. He had failed his wife. Here wasanother chance he had, and he failed his Christian oath as a manof God, and he escaped into his past where some member of hisfamily was brave enough to match the moment.But it was put at that point in thebook, I think, because I thought that was the most effective place forit. Sir, do you find it easier to create a female character in literature ora male character? It's much more fun to try to write about women because I think women aremarvelous. They're wonderful, and I know very little about them,and so Iit's much more fun to try towrite about women than about men. More difficult, yes. Sir, in "Delta Autumn," in athe thoughts of Ike McCaslin when he's talkingto the colored girl, you write, "Maybe in a thousand or two thousand years inAmerica, but not now, not now." I wasI was wondering how you might apply that to thepresent-day conditions that have happened since the writing of the story, withthe Supreme Court decision and what-not. He used "a thousand or two thousand years" in his despair. He had seen acondition which was intolerable, which shouldn't be, but it was, and he wassaying, in effect, that thisthis must be changed. Thiscannot go on, but I'm too old to do anything about it, that maybe in a thousandyears, somebody will be young enough and strong enough to do something about it.That wasthat was all he meant by the numbers, but I think that hesaw, asas everybody that thinks, that a condition like that isintolerable, not so much intolerable to man's sense of justice but maybeintolerable to a condition, to the condition, thatany country has reached the point where, if it is to endure, it must have noinner conflicts based on a wrong, a basic human wrong.  in youryour story "A RoseA Rose for Emily," was she drawn from afrom a realpersonreal character, or is she made up out of your mind? No, no, I think a writer uses observation, experience, imagination. Henever knows just how much of which he does use, but I don't believe you canwrite a very good or very moving story about a human being in thethe proscribed limits ofof a story or a book and take a human being from life. Ittakes sixty years to create a complete and rounded human being, butthe writer hasn't got that much time. He's only got thirty minutes, or at thebest, three or four hours, and so probably any writer ishas made acomposite picture. It'sit's people he knew or things he imagined,things he read, things he heard, but he wouldn't bother with trying to reduceto paper or to put onto paper any living creature. Also, there's a quality ofof God-like omnipotence that the fury ofofcreating something gives you, and you're not satisfied with the way God did it.You can improve on him just a little.  Sir, in "Was," can you tell us how Uncle Buck successfully foiled anattempt by Mr. Hubert Beauchamp to get him to marry Sophonsiba? Well, eventuallythey do get married, and I wonder if you could give us any idea as to how sheeventually caught him? Oh, I think that women are much stronger, much moredetermined than men, and just because these men had wasted an evening over adeck of cards, that hadn't changed Miss Sophonsiba's intentions at all. Andprobably Uncle Buck finally just gave up. That was his fate, and hehemight just as well quit struggling.  Sir, can you tell us where Sutpen acquired his money in "Wedding in theRain," when he came back and hefirst, he came back with the architectand all histhe Negroes or sort of creatures that he had, and builthis house, and later on came back with the furnishings. He very likely looted his Caribbean father-in-law's plantation when hemarried the daughter. I don't know that I ever decided myself just how he didit, but very likely he looted and wreckedwrecked the whole place,tooktook the girl because he didn't want her especially. He wanted ason. He wanted to establish his dynasty. And I imagine that hehe gotthat money to the States and then had to hide it here and there. There were nobanks in those days, no safe place to put it. Probably was gold,something that was intrinsic of itself, and he would go off wherever he hadburied it and dig up a little more when he needed it. Sir, in your story "The Bear," why did Boon kill Sam Fathers? Because Sam asked him to. Sam's life had finished then. He was an oldman. He was sick, andand Sam at that point represented his wholerace. The white man had dispossessed the whole race. They had nothing left, andSam was old. He was weak and sick. That was the Greek conception.And Sam knew that Boon and this little boy who was too young to have used theknife, or whatever it was, would defend Sam's right to die and would approve ofthe fact that Boon, the instrument, was willing to kill Sam. ButSam was done with life, and he wanted that done, andand Boon was theservant that did it. Sir, in "A Rose for Emily," is it possible to take Homer Barron and Emilyand sort of show that one represents the South and the North? Was therewas there anythingon your part there trying to show the North and the South in sort of a battle?Maybe Miss Emily representing the South coming out victorious in the odd waythat she did? That would be only incidental. I think that the writer istoo busy trying to create flesh and blood people that will stand up and cast ashadow to have time to be conscious ofof all thesymbolism that he may put into what he does or what people may read into it,that [if] he had time tothat is, if one individual couldcould write theauthentic, credible flesh-and-blood character and at the same time deliver themessage, maybe he would, but I don't believe any writer is capable of doingboth, that he's got to choose one of the two. Either he is delivering a message,or he's trying to create flesh-and-blood, living, suffering, anguishing humanbeings. And as any man works out of his past, since any manno man ishimself, he's a sum of his past, and in a way, if you can acceptthe term, of his future, too. And this struggle between the Southand the North could have been a part of my background, my experience, without meknowing it.  Sir, why is it in "Death Drag," Jock left CaptaindespiteCaptain Warren's plea to stay there or to accept the raincoat or to accept anysort of job. Was there anything besides pride that made him leave, [fly off in]that old crate? Yes, it waswell, pride was about what it was.Theit's, of courseIt is probably true of allall flyingpeople, but I do know that the flying people out of that war,most of them would've been better off if they had died on the eleventh ofNovember, that few of them were any good to try to take up theburden of peace, and thisthis man was lost and doomed.Of course, Warren was different. He had managed to cope withwith1919, but this other man would never cope with 1919. He was hopeless. He wasdoomed. Sir, in your novels, you said in one of the other classes that you beginwith a character in mind, or more than one character. In your short stories, dotheydo you conceive of them in the same way, or do you start with aperson or do you? Sometimes with a person, sometimes with an anecdote. Butthe short story is conceived in the same terms that the book is.Thethe first job the craftsman faces is to tell this as quickly andas simply as I can. And if he's good, if he's ofof the first [order],like Chekhov, he can do it every time in two or three thousand words, but ifhe's not that good, sometimes it takes him eighty thousand words. But theyareare similar, and he is simply trying to tell something which wastrue and moving in the shortest time he can, and then, if he has sense enough,stop. That is, I don't believe the man or the woman sits down and says, "Now I'mgoing to write a short story," or "Now I'm going to write a novel." It's an ideathat begins with thewith the thought, the image of acharacter or of an anecdote and, even in the same breath, almost like lightning,itit begins to take a shape that he can see whether it's going to bea short story or a novel. Sometimes, not always. Sometimes he thinks it'll be ashort story and finds that he can't. Sometimes it looks like it's to be a novel,and then, after he works on it, he sees that it's not, that he can tell it intwo thousand or five thousands words. No rule to it. Sir, is it true that you don't read your critics? Yes, that's right. Could you elaborate on that?  Well, when the work is finished, and it don't suit me, andI'm the one that's got to be suited, and that one didn't, so by that time I'mbusy working on another one, and I just don't get around to reading the critics because that to me is water under thebridge. You see, there's nothing more I can do to it. And he can't do anythingto it either.  Do you ever read your own work over again after a lapse of,say No, that's the nice thing about writing. That's always one book youwon't have to read, no matter how long [it is]. Do you have any trouble remembering, say, a short story you might'vewritten in 1925 or something like that? I remember the people, but I can't remember what story they are in, noralways what they did. I have to go back and look at it to unravel what theperson was doing. I remember the character, though. when you read, do you frequently find that you get so manyideas after reading a few pages that you find yourself more willing andinterested in beginning to write something or continue to read? That is, do youthink writers find difficulty in reading? Well, I'mI'm convinced that the writer never stops working, that even whenhe's reading, hehe is not deliberately looking forforideas or what we might saycall inspiration, but he never knows justwhen fromfrom what page, what paragraph, in what book something mightstrike him. He's got to put that book down and get a piece of paper and write.I'm convinced of that.Mr. Faulkner Yes.When you think of a short story or a novel taking shape inyour mind, and you know which form it's to take, how much of a pattern do youhave in mind as it takes shape, before you get it down on paper? Not always too much. If youif it's all complete,the form and the pattern, too, then it's a tour de force. That'sjust a matter of sitting down and swatting it out, but if it's anidea and then begins to take a tremendous and nebulous, almostformless shape, then the book itself commands itsits progress, thatthe book itself takes charge and does a certain amount of selecting. I thinkthat you think ofof any number ofof things, actions, thatthe characters might perform and what they might say that there's no place inthe story that you're telling for. They sound fine to you, but there just ain'tany place in that story, that the book itself has taken charge,says, "No, no, we don't want that. We'll have this one."When writing a novel or a short story, do you get obsessed with yourthoughts, and do you write constantly for hours on end, or do you more or lesslook at it objectively ? Well, it'sit's fun to do, and the tendency is tooverdo it just like you're in a game, something you like, thatyouyour judgment would say you'd better stop now, you're gettingtired, you're notnot doing too well, but it's still fun, and you keepon. I've madeI tried to make one rule, to stop while it's still hot.That is, to leave it while I'm looking good, as GentlemenPrefer Blondes says.Do you ever jump up in the middle of the night and write somethingdown? Oh, yes. Yes, lots of times. I've never had anyany order. Ihave heard of people that can set aside so many hours a day andor towrite so many words a day, but that has never been for me. I write when it'shot, then I quit and rest, and then I get at it again, sometimes fourteen orsixteen hours a day, and then sometimes I won't write a word for fourteen orsixteen days. Sir, in Intruder in the Dust, I believe you say thatintegration in the South could only be accomplished by the South itself throughsome external means of triggering, you might say? I think you used theexpression "a snowball starting an avalanche." Yes.Well, exactly how far do you think this is going right now, thissnowball? It was going along too slowly, I mean, not too slowly forthe white people in the South, but too slowly forfor the Negro. Butit was moving. Itit was actually in motion. The last two or threeyears, it has stopped andand in ways, has retrograded. There was alittle too much pressure from outside. But there areare people in theSouth that, more thanthan justjust me, that recognize thesituation as being intolerable, not from a humanitarian point of view, but froma practical point of view, that a country cannot endure with a minority as bigas seventeen million people, second-rate citizens. It justfaced withthewith the trouble that we face in the world,that'sthat's badbad business.And you think that this triggering effect lasted too long, that itshould've been ceased sooner? Well, itthe push carried on too long. If there'd been a nudgeand then, stop, and let the ball move of its own weight. But success goes toanyone's head, and it creates its own illusion, and the people who had felt thatthings were going too slow, that that'sanything that slow was notprogress, it was difficult to tell them to stop. You couldn't expect them tostop. That that hashas done harm, but I think that will not reallydelay equality for the Negro. It will cause a great deal ofof troubleand anguish, and individuals will suffer, but I think the course ofofthe Negro's advancement in the South hasn't been hurt by this. I don't thinkit's been helped very much by it, except that somebody somewherehas got to nudge us now and then, that we do go too slow if it's left toourselves. People are too prone to say, "Oh, well, things are all right." Like thesign in the Pullman Car that says, "Quiet is requested for the sake of thosewho have already retired." That sort of thing, you know. Sir, I understand with Sanctuary, you've said thatit was written for the sensational value of it. Would you say now for a youngwriter, who might be trying to break into it, do you think that he should devotehis time and talents, if any, towards a sensational type of work, or do youthink that he should try and write more or less from the soul, you might say, orwrite as heas he feels, rather than what he feels might be accepted? I would say, if he is creating characters which are flesh-and-bloodpeople, are believable, and are honest and true, then he can use sensationalismif he thinks that's an effective way to tell his story. But if he's writing justfor sensationalism, then he has betrayed thehis vocation, and hedeserves to suffer from it. That is, sensationalism is, in a way,an incidental tool, that he might use sensationalism as the carpenter picks upanother hammer to drive a nail, but he doesn'tthe carpenter don'tbuild a house just to drive nails. He drives nails to build a house. Would you say Peyton Place was justified in thein thesensationalism? Have you read that? I don't know the book, but if they are flesh-and-bloodpeople, if he was trying to write about human beings rather thanabout sensation in the sensationalism, Yes, I will accept and pass. But if he wasjust trying to write sensationalism, then that's another horse.Do you have time to read quite a bit? Plenty of time. I don't do it. I read the books I knew and loved when Iwas a young man, read them over and over. The new ones I don'tdon'tkeep up with too well, unless someone tells me, "This is a good book,you should read it." Then I will stop and read it.When you read these books you've read before,do you findnew things in them constantly? In the sense that you find new things inin oldfriends.That is, there's some reason that you like to go backand spend an hour or two with an old friend. It may notbebe for anything new, unless the evocation with a little moreexperience on your own part willwill throw a new light onto something that youthought you knew before, and you find now you didn't, that you maybe know alittle more about truth, that what the good writers say to theyoung man, he knows instinctively are true things.Later on, as he knows a littlemore, he knows why they're true and, in that sense, it is something new,yes.Could you give us some of the titles of these books, Mr. Faulkner? Yes'm. I read Don Quixote ever year. I read theOld Testament. I read some of Dickens ever year, and I've got a portableShakespeare, a one-volume Shakespeare that I carry along with me. Conrad. Moby-Dick. Chekhov. Madame Bovary.Some of Balzac almost every year. Tolstoy. I haven'thaven't thoughtof Artzybashev in years. I think I'll get thehim out and read him again.Artzybashev. Gogol. Most of the Frenchmen of the nineteenth centuryI read in every year.  you must've read some of Erskine Caldwell once upon atime. I did, yes. When he first began to write and the stuff wasfirst rate, I did. I read a lot of it. I read a lot of all mycoevals at that time.  Sorry.[We'll go ahead here then.]Sir, of the new books you say you occasionally read, have you found anyin the last few years that you regard as superior books, superior writing? I remember one about a destroyer in the Pacific by, I believe he wasa Virginia man, Eyster? That was I thoughtthoughta pretty good book. There's a young man in Mississippi named ShelbyFoote that shows promise if he'll just stop trying to writeFaulkner and write some Shelby Foote.Andyes,I've seen aseen a few books, but I don't remember titles nor writerstoo well. I remember characters andand incidents that seem to be me to be true,which is the test. I'm sorry, there werewereyou next? Or you? Well, sir, you then.What about the Greek tragedies? Do you ever enjoy reading those? When I was young, yes. I haven'thaven't read it any of theGreek tragedies in a long time. But when I was young, yes.Sir, we take for granted .Do you read primarily the books that you've read, you say, whenyou were younger or the books of times gone by? You don't think terribly highlyof the books that are put out, say, in the last twenty years? Well, I don't know, you see, because I haven'thaven't seenthem. It's simply because asas the writer grows oldI've heard otherwriters say this, too, they read less and less. I don't know why that is,butbut most writers, as they grow old, they seem to read less andless. It's not that they're indifferent to theirto their juniors.It'sit can't be any jealousy because I think that any sincere writerhashas failed to do what he'd like to do. That is, itit'snot better than was ever done before.But he has enough belief inhisin his craft, his avocation, to be convinced thatbehind him someone is comecoming that will do it, that may do it. Andas I say, Iit's not because I don't like to read anymore. I simplyread less than I did. And when I do read, it'sit's when there'snothing better to do, you might say, and so I'll pick up the book just to passtime. When I was younger, I was an avid reader because I was learning. That wasthe way I learned my craft. I read everything I could get my hands on to see howit was done, what to do. Sir, what do you think of Aristotle's theories about tragedy? There'swide dispute about that now with Death of a Salesman, doyou think he's right or ? What theory is this?Thatthat a tragedy mustthe hero must be a man of high place sothat he can fall all the further. Well, I don't think Aristotle meant by high place whatwhat itsounds like. I think he meant a man ofof integrity more thanathan a man of aristocracy, unlessis that what you meantby high place?Well, that's what I say. I believe he does mean money-wise andsociety-wise rather than integrity, but I'm not an authority [on that, butthat's] Well, I think that was because he used the high place,the money, the riches or the title asassymbols, that athat a king must be brave, a queen must be chaste, assimple symbols, as puppets. But tragedy as Aristotle saw it, it'sIwould say is the same conception of tragedy that all writers have.Itit's man wishing to be braver than he is, inin combat with his heartor with his fellows or with the environment, and how he fails. Atthe splendor, the courage of his failure, thatandthe trapping of royalty, of kingship were simply trappings to makehim more splendid so that he was worthy ofof being selected by thegods, by Olympus as an opponent, that man couldn't cope with him, so it wouldtake a god to do it, to cast him down.  I'm interested in the relationship between your observationabout the critical process as being primarily an imaginative one, in whichyouyou do not simply try to hold a mirror up to a particularcharacter in the scene, but in which your product is the product of yourimagination, which is in the background, the product of all that you've learned.This, youyou've said, meant thatmeans that, if a writer sets a patternfor himself and sees the pattern of the whole work, then his writing becomesmerely a matter of swatting it out. Does this mean, for example, that Paradise Lost, in which the pattern was set, is to alarge extent, merely a matter of swatting it out, or that any man who, likeSpenser in the Faerie Queen, conceives of an idea as theobjective, rather than the production of the mere product of imagination, doesthis mean also that Spenser did just swatting it out? I don't think so. I don't think that the pattern as he sees itis that rigid, that the pattern is ais a general ideawithin accepted or circumscribed limits, but not rigid limits. They're simplycircumscribed. Thatthat the imagination must be checked by [something] andthe pattern conform oror meet or be amicable, we'll say, and when onehas to give, I believe it's always the pattern that has to give, and so he's gotto rewrite to create a new pattern with a [bulge] that will takethisthis [bulge] of the imagination which insists that it's true. Itmust be.  before I ask this question, I'd like to say that I reallyagree with what you said a while ago about the races in the South. Carlyle Ibelieve said of [words] that indignation makes verses. Do youalso think that indignation makes great novels? Yes'm, it depends on what the indignation is toward. If it's indignationtoward a condition, it doesn't always make a great novel. It could maybe. It'sgot to be an indignation atat man's condition, not hisparticular situation, but at his condition. It's somethingthat'sthat's got to be strong enough to raise the steam,to make the artist assume the anguish and trouble and travail of puttingsomething down on paper or in music or to paint it or to hack it out of a pieceof marble. That'scould be indignation, but it'sit's indignation atman's condition, I believe, not at at a particular instance ofinjustice or cowardice. That might be the germ in which an individual,the conception of a man, the idea of an individual againstthat temporary condition could make the book, but that bookdidn't create the individual. The individual is thetool to show the condition.  did you ever find yourself surprised at repeating yourselfwhen you say, "By Jove, I did that thing better twenty-five years ago," or, "ByJove, this is better than it was twenty-five years ago"? No, because to me, there ain't any better. It's either good or it'snothing, and it'swhat I did twenty-five years ago didn't suit me, andso I forgot that. I'm I'm working on another one.I hope thatthis one is going to be the right one. Of course, I know it ain't, butthe one twenty-five years ago is under thebridge. It's too bad, but there's nothing I can do about it anymore, exceptwrite a new one.Mr. Faulkner  Do you think the author has the prerogative to create his own language,in other words, to go against what the people create, vernacular? Do you thinkan author has the right to create his ownI believe Joyce and Eliot havedone it, have tried to createthey found that language wasnotdid not suit their purpose, so they had to go beyond and maketheir own language. He has the right to do that, provided he don't insist on anyoneunderstanding it.Thatthat is, what I'mtryingtrying to say is thatI believe I'm paraphrasing Whitman;didn't he say, "To have good poets we must have good readers, too," somethinglike that? Who knows?Great audiences. That'swell, the writer actuallythat'sanan obligation that he assumes with his vocation, that he's going towrite it in a way that people can understand it. He doesn't haveto write it in the way that every idiot can understand it, everyimbecile in the third grade can understand it, but he's got to use a languagewhichwhich is accepted, and in which the words have a specificmeaning that everybody agrees on. I think that Finnegan'sWake and Ulysses werewere justified,but then it's hard to say on what terms they were justified. That was a case ofa genius who was electrocuted by the divine fire.   it's often been said about great novels or great shortstories that they wouldn't pass muster in the freshman English compositioncourse. Now I was wondering, since this is your first day at the University, ifyou had any comments on the traditional or the apparently traditional conflictbetween the creative writer and the schoolman? Well, as an old veteran sixth grader, that question is I thinkoutoutside of my province,becauseI never got to freshman English. I don't know how much it would conflict. Maybebefore I've left the University, I will be able to pass freshman English.   with more and more capable Negroes coming to the fore inall facets of the public life, do you believe that half a dozen capable Negrofiction writers could do a world of good for the segregation problem? I do, yes.Out of seventeen million people and some of them becoming very adequatephysicians and lawyers, don't you believe that they can develop some writers ofstature also? I do, yes. I think that people like Armstrong and Dr.Ralph Bunche and George Washington Carver have done much more for the Negro racethanthan all of the NAACP leaders, much more. Andthere's no reason at all whywhy the Negro shouldn't produce goodwriters. He has got to have he has got to be freed ofoftheof the curse of his color. He'she's got to have equality interms that he can get used to it and forget that heis a Negro while he's writing, just like the white man hasn't gottime to remember whether he's a Gentile or a Catholic while he's writing. Andthe Negro has got to reach that stage, and the white man's got tohelp him, because he can't do it by himself under these conditions.He's in the best position to write sympathetically about his ownconditions? He should be, yes.But you can't write sympathetically about a conditionwhen it'swhen it's a constant outrage to you, you see. You've got tobe objective about it. I do, yes. Theythey didn't give him success, but they gavehim something a lot more important, even in this country. They gave himserenity. They gave him what would pass for wisdom. I mean,wisdom as contradistinct from the schoolman's wisdom of education. They gave himthat. No. No, no, children.That had been transmitted to him? In a way, everyevery little eight- or ten-year-old boy washis son, his child, the ones that he taught how to hunt. He had passed on whathe had. He was not trying to tell them how to slay animals. He was tryingto teach them what he knew ofof respect for whateveryour lot in life is, that if your lot is to be a hunter, to slayanimals, you slay the animals withwith the nearest approach you canto dignity and to decency.Mr. Faulkner I think you were speaking about the act of creation a while ago.Sometimes we read that many authors seem to create with awith a high degree ofobjectivity, and that other authors have the feeling that when they're goingabout this process, they are almost in the very act of experiencing, literally,the things that their created people are experiencing. In someofof the people that you've created that you have enjoyed doing most,or felt you hit off most truly, have you ever had the illusion, or thefeeling, that in the act of creation that the sensations wereyou wereexperiencing them almost as if this act were literally happening to you? Not exactly, because when my people come alive, they take charge of whatwe're doing, and I'm going at a dead run to keep up and put downwhat they do and say. I don't have time to think much about myself in thisbusiness. I'm too busy trying to keep up with them, that theytheytalk and act too fast. I'm afraid that if I stop for a minute,I'll miss something.And I know that I can't invent it because they've takencharge. They're doing the inventing by that time. I'm just the secretary bythen. Sir, you say you invent that. Well, I imagine this might come of one ofyour very, very long sentences, but yet you say they're very carefullycontrived. Well, what do you do? Get down what comes out and then go back andwork over it? That's right.Perfect it? That's right. It'sI think that probably goesback to the burden which man carries all his life, is the knowledge of death. That is, he knows that he won't live forever, and he's found something soamazing and so moving, which is breathing or beingbeingin the world, a part of it, and in a way he is attempting to write the wholehistory of the human heart on the head of a pin, because he thinks he may notlast long enough to put it down on anything as big as a piece of paper. Also, Ithink that a man at any moment of action is the living sum of his past,thatand the reason forfor the long sentences that go sofar into the past and into the future is that belief, that man at the verymoment at which he is doing something, he did that particular thing exactly inthat way because of the hundred years before him that made him, and that'ssimply a matter of trying to remind the reader that this man iscomplete in motion, only because he is the sum of his ancestors and hiscondition, his times.Do you often find that you can improve on what you've originally putdown? Oh, yes, yes. I think any writer keeps at it until he knows that that'sthe best he can do. It may not be good enough, but when he realized that's thebest he can do, then he moves on to the next sentence or the next paragraph.That's not exactly what I meant. I mean, you say you write as fast as youcan to get it out, and then you go back and build up the constructions in there and No, no. I didn't mean that. I mean that I don'tlike tothe mechanics of putting the stuff on paper, and I try to getit in shape in my mind before I take thedo the work. I didn't meanthat I scribble and then went back over it andand edit it, no.It'sit's done as much as possible mentally, until it begins to soundright. Then I put it down. Sir, in your writing, youyou find you get very close to people and drawpeople as you think they are. What do you think of the approach of men likeMencken and Shaw who reallyor possibly I'm wrong, but I don't thinkthey're trying to give the public a picture of people. They're rather tryingto slap them in the face a little bit and paint in extremes. Well, they werewere using the tools of their trade as they believed theywere the best tools. I think thatthat Shawwas trying to write about human beings in thein thelight of his own intelligence and his own wit and his own distastefor certain conditions. I think that Mencken was stillaa constantly angry, indignant man, morehe was first that.He was only second a critic or a sociologist. He was mainly just a mad man. Shaw, of course, wasn't. Shawwaswas an artist. You mentioned a while ago, in noting some of the books that you likedparticularly, Madame Bovary and also Tolstoy. I take fromwhat you also said, that the things you admire about these two very differentartists would be the fact that they both hit the truth, Flaubert in hisextremely precise  Oh, yes.Tolstoy in his almost shapeless way. Would youwould you saysomething about your own preferences or attitudes toward the different extremesof craftsmanship in War and Peace as opposed to Bovary? Well, in Bovary I saw, or thought I saw, a manwho wasted nothing, who waswhose approach toward his language wasalmost the lapidary's, that he washewhether he had theleisure, I don't know exactly for what thewhat the term Iwantthat is, a man whowho elected to do one bookperfectly, in thein the characters and in the method, in the style,asas against a man who was so busy writing about people that hedidn't have much time to bother about style, and when he did attain style, hewas just as astonished as anybody else. Though that comparison, Igrant you, is better between Flaubert and Balzac, maybe. WellI think of the man that wrote Salammbo and the La Tentation de St. Antoineand Madame Bovary was a stylist who wasalsohadhad enough talent to write about people, too. Buteverybody can't do that. Everybody can't do both. You have to choose, maybe,what shall I do? Shall I try to tell the truth about people, or shall I try totell the truth in ain a chalice?Does the luxuriance of the foliage in War andPeace offend your sensesense of craftsmanship? No. No, nothingI'm not enough of a conscious craftsmanto remember that I have ever been offended byby anystyle oror method. That I think that themoment inin the book, the story, demands its own style, and seems tome just as natural as the moment in the year produces the leaf. It's whenMelville becomes Old Testament Biblical, that seems natural to me. When hebecomes gothic, that seems natural to me, too, and I hadn'treallyhadn't stopped to think, Now where does one change and become another? Thoughwithwith the Bovary, it's as though you know from the veryfirst, as soon as you see what is going, that he will never disappoint you, thatit would be asasas absolute as mathematics.[You filled] the full hour,and thank you. Well, we'll begin by [asking Mr. Faulknerquestions], raise your hand if you have one.  this is sort of a question of motivation for the writer, andmany of the best southern writers write about the degeneration of the oldaristocracy and its determination to live and to think according to the oldtraditions and standards. Now, do you think that this continued determination onthe part of those around him causes the writer to revolt against this system,and accordingly, is it adoes this attitude, does it furnish a motivation forwriting? It does, in that that is acondition of environment. It's something that is handed to the writer. He iswriting about people in the terms that he's most familiar with. That is, itcould have sociological implications, but he's not too interested in that. He iswriting about people. He is using the material which he knows, the tools whichare at hand, and so he uses the instinct or the desire or whatwhatever youwill call it of the old people to be reactionary and tory, to stick to the oldways. It's simply a condition. And since it is a condition, it lives andbreathes, and it is valid as material.  Sir, I believe you were in Europe in 1923 at the same time as Andersonand Hemingway and others. At that time, did you associate with them and, if not,was there any specific reason why you were not thrown together, and do you thinkthat that group was influenced or influenced each other in any way asfrom theirassociation? They may have. I think theartist is influenced by all in his environment. He's maybe more sensitive to itbecause he'shas got to get the materials, the lumber that he's going to buildhis edifice with. Iat that time, I didn't think of myself as a writer. I was atramp then, and I didn't I wasn't interestedin literature nor literary people. They wereI was there at the same time. Iknew JoyceI knew of Joyce, and I would go to some effort to go to the caf thathe inhabited to look at him, but that was the only literary man that I rememberseeing in Europe in those days. How did Sutpen get all his money in "Wedding for theWedding in the Rain"? It was saidthat he got it by robbing showboats, I think, but how did he get I think that he looted hisfather-in-law's Caribbean plantation. I think that his drive to revengehimself on theon the man who had told him to go around to the back door, byestablishing a dynasty of his own, and he was ruthless about it, and he probablypicked out the easiest money he could get, and one quick way to get some of itwas to marry the daughter. Another quick way, instead of waiting for the old manto die,to loot the plantation, which I think he did, andhe probably brought it to the mainland and hid it, and whenever he needed moremoney, he would go and dig up a little more of it. It was probably in bullion,gold, jewels, maybe. But I'm sure that's the way he got it.  would you say that much writing is the result of unrestwithin the writer? I think it's all a result of unrest in the writer. I thinkthink thewriter is demon-driven, that he can't be at peace unless he is trying totake the sorry, shabby world which he finds, and he can't change it physically,so he cancan create a world of his own, in which people areare braver orbetter blackguards or better heroes or more chaste or better villains than hefinds in the world around him. He's demon-driven, I think.Is this ever really satisfying him? Yes, what satisfies him is thebelief that, this time, he's going to create that world which will match thedream. Of course, it don't, and so he writes another book tomorrow. That onewon't either, and he'll write another one. Maybe if he ever did write one thatpleased him, he would be miserable. Nothing else to do. Sir, it has been argued that "A Rose for Emily" is a criticism of theNorth, and others have argued saying that it is a criticism of the South. Now,could this story, shall we say, be more properly classified as a criticism ofthe time? Now that I don't know because I was simply trying to write about people.The writer uses environmentwhat he knowsand if there's a symbolism in whichthe lover represented the North and theand the woman who murdered himrepresents the South, I don't say that's not valid and not there, but it was nointention of the writer to say, "Now let's see, I'm going to write a piece inwhich I willwill use a symbolism for the North and another symbol for theSouth," that he was simply writing about people, a story which he thought wastragic and true because itit came out of theout of the human heart, of humanaspiration, the humanthe conflict ofof conscience withwith glands, with theOld Adam. It was a conflict not between the North and South so much as between,well, you might say, God and Satan. Sir, just a little more on that thing. You say it's a conflict betweenGod and Satan. Well, I don't quite understand whatwhat you mean there. Whoisdid one represent the ? The conflict was in Miss Emily, that she knew that you do not murderpeople. She wasshe had been trained thatthat you do not take a lover, youmarry. You don't take a lover. She had broken all thethe laws of her tradition,her background, and she had finally broken the law of God, too, which says youdo not take human life. And she knew she was doing wrong, and that's why herherown life was wrecked. Instead of having murdered one lover, and then to go onandand take another and when she used him up to murder him, she was expiatingher crime. But can't a person like Miss Emily, though she did do all the things thatshe had been taught not to, and being a sensitive sort of a woman, it was sureto have told on her, but do you think it's fair to feel pity for her because, ina way, she made her adjustment, and it seemed to have wound up in a happy sortof a waycertainly tragicbut maybe it suited her just fine. Yes, it may have, but then Idon't think that one should withhold pity simply because the subject ofthe pity, object of the pity, is pleased and satisfied. I think the pity isinin the human striving against its own nature, against its own conscience.That's what deserves the pity. It's not the fate of the individual. It's man inconflict with his heart or with his fellows or with his environment.That'sthat's what deserves the pity. It's not that the man suffered or that hefell off the house or was run over by the train. It's that he wasthat man istrying to do the best he can with his desires and impulses, against hisown moral conscience and the the conscience ofthe social conscience ofof histime and his place, the little town he must live in, the family he's a partof.In "The Bear,"wasthere a dog, a real Lion? Yes, there was. I can rememberthat dog. I was about the age of that little boy, and he belonged to our pack ofbear and deer dogs, and he was a complete individualist. Hehe didn't loveanybody. The other dogs were all afraid of him. He was a savage.But hehediddid love to run the bear. Yes, I remember him quite well. He was mostlyAiredale. He had some hound, and Lord only knows what else might've been in him.He was a tremendous big brute, stood about that high. Must've weighedseventy-five or eighty pounds. in any bear hunt thatLion participated in, did he ever perform heroic action like the one in thestory? No, not really. There's a case ofthe sorry, shabby world that don't quite please you, so you create one ofyour own, so youyou make Lion a little braver than he was, and you make thebear a little more the bear than he actually was. I'mI'm sure that Lion couldhave done that andandwould have done it, and it may be at times when I wasn'tthere to record the action he did do things like that. This question is also concerned with "The Bear." In the conclusion of thestory, Ike McCaslin finds Boon destroying his rifle. Now, I was wondering ifthis incident just showed that Boon could not, so you say, compete with themechanical age, or whether this was showing the end of an order, the fact thatLion and that Old Ben were dead, that the hunters weren't returning to the cabinany more, and the land had been sold to a lumber company. A little of both. It was thatBoon, with the mentality of aof a child, a boy ofof sixteen or seventeen,couldn't cope not only with the mechanical age, but he couldn't cope with anytime. Also, itto me, it underlined thethe heroic tragedy of the bear and thedog by the last survival being reduced to the sort ofof petty comedy of someonetrying to patch up a gun in order to shoot a squirrel. That made the tragedyofof the dog and the bear a little more poignant to me. That's the sort of tour de force that I think the writer is entitled to use. Sir, the other day you said that you don't try to inject yourself into asituation about which you're writing andand feel how you might react if you were acertain person. You said you didn't do that. Is itdo your charactersdo theiractions come about strictly from anan unconscious feeling on your part, or do theyjust flow out or ? I prefer to think that thecharacters areare alive enough to stipulate and postulate their own behaviorand actions, that the actions ofof course, they come from my own experience ofpeople, but I prefer to think that the characters, by that time, have takencharge of the story, and that they're ones that are saying what they would doand what they will say, that all they need then is someone to trot along andput it down. That actually, it wouldn't be, to me, much fun in inventingfigures just to project my own ideas. These ideas I grant you are mine,butbut they are the lumber inin the attic thatin the carpenter'sworkshop. Now and then he needs a board, so he reaches back and finds it, andsure enough it fits. That is, he has to cut it and trim it a little, but itfits. I know that you've stated that you don't read the critics regarding your ownwork. However, I wonder what ideas you have regarding the aims or the properfunction of a literary critic, not only of your works but, shall we say, ofothers as well? I would say he has a validfunction, a very important function, butbut to me he's a good deal like theminister. You don't need to listen to him unless you need him, and I, in my owncase,I know I have already decided aboutthe value of my work. There's nothing anybody can tell me I don't know about it,and the critic, nor I either, can improve it any by that time, and the only wayto improve it is to write one that will be better next time, and so I'm at that,and I probably just don't have time to read the critic. Sir, when you started to write, did you write to say something to otherpeople or did you write mostly for your own satisfaction? Because it was fun.I became awriter by a chance. I've told this story before, some of you may have heard it.I was running whiskey for a New Orleans bootlegger back in Prohibition days, andI met Sherwood Anderson, and I liked him from the first. We would meet in theafternoons, and we would walk around New Orleans, andand he would talk and Iwould listen. Then in the evening, we would meet, and we'd sit somewhere anddrink, and he would talk and I would listen. In the morning, he would be inseclusion working, and that went on day after day, and I thought that if thatwas what a writer's life was, that would be the life for me,and so I wrote a book andand after the first dayor two, I found out that writing was fun. It was just about the nicest thinganybody could do, and I was having so much fun at it that I even forgot aboutMr. Anderson. I hadn't seen him in, oh, several weeks, and I met Mrs. Andersonon the street, and she said, "We haven't seen you in some time." I said, "Yes'm,I'm writing a book." So I saw her again on the street, and she said, "I toldSherwood you were writing a book, and Sherwood said, 'My God,'"  and I saw her later on. She said, "How's the bookgetting along?" I said, "I'm just about to finish it." And she said, "Do youwant Sherwood to read it?" I hadn't thought about anybody reading the thing because it was fun, and I said, "Yes'm, I don't mind if he wants to," so shetold him about it. I saw her again, and she says, "Sherwood says if he don'thave to read it, he'll make a trade with you. If he don't have to read it, he'lltell his publisher to take it." So I said, "Done." And so he told Mr. Liveright to take it, andthat's how I got published.But by that time,I'd found out that writing was fun to do, and that that was simply my cupof tea, and I've been at it since, ever since.Mr. Faulkner  Did they take it just the way it was or  Yes'm.Now, what would you have done if they had asked you to make changes? Well, I don't know because I hadlost my bootlegging job, ortheI believethe Federal people finally caught him, and I had a job as an ordinaryseaman in a freighter then. I wasI spent the next year or two in ships, and bythat time, I was working on another book, and so I wasgot out of touch with thisone. I don'tI reckon I would've changed it probably, if the publisher had said,"If you make a few changes, we'll print it," I probably would. Sir, I think you said that you haven't yet achieved your own personalgoal as a writer. What is that goal, and is it likely that you will succeed[or achieving it]? That's difficult to say.It'sit's when I have done something that, to use Hemingway's phrase, makes mefeel good, that isthat is completely satisfactory. Maybe that will be the goal,and I hope just a little that I'll never quite do that because if I do, therewon't be any reason to go on writing, and I'm too old to take up another hobby.It'sI think that a writer wants to make something that he knows that a hundred or two hundred or five hundred, a thousand years later will makepeople feel what they feel when they read Homer or read Dickens or Balzac,Tolstoy.That that's probably his goal. I don't think that he bothers until hegets old like this and has the right to spend a lot of time talking about it toput that intointo actual words, but probably that's what he wants, that reallythe writer doesn't want success, that he knows he has a short span of life, thatthe day will come when he must pass through the wall of oblivion, and he wantsto leave a scratch on that wall, "Kilroy was here," that somebody a hundred or athousand years later will see. Sir, why do you regard The Sound and the Fury asyour best work? It was the best failure. It wasthe one that I anguished the most over, that I worked the hardest at, thateven when I knew I couldn't bring it off, I still worked at it.Like the parentfeels toward the unfortunate child maybe. The othersothers that have beeneasier to write than that, and in ways are better books than that, but I don'thave the feeling toward any of them that I do toward that one because that wasthe most gallant, the most magnificent failure.  you said that even though you did not bring it off, youworked hardest at it. How do you feel that you failed to bring The Sound and the Fury off? It don't make me feel good enough, to use Hemingway's phrase. That's acondition that probably I can't put into words, but if I ever do strike it, Iwill know it. I think that's true of any writer.Well, aren't there parts of it that make you feel good enough? Well, that's not enough,parts of it are not enough. It must be all, yousee. You can't compromise, you know.It'sit's either good or it ain't. There'sno degrees of goodness. It's either all right or it's not all right.  how do you feel about A Fable? The FablewasI don't have the same feeling toward that because the Fable was a book that came out of an idea. The others werecame outof people. The Fable was an idea, and at that time, Ifelt that I had learned enough about my craft to do it about as well asasanyone could have done it, and that's, to me, a satisfactory book, but itititdoesn't move me like The Sound and the Fury did. The Sound and the Fury is one book that I would like towrite over, I know I couldn't do it better. But the Fable, no, I don't want to write that anymore.Can you make any comment on the part that the old general plays in A Fable? He seemed to me to take two distinct, differentparts if not more, in the theme of passion week including the three temptations.Would you care to elaborate at all on that character? Well, to me he was the dark, splendid fallen angel. The good shiningcherubim, to me, are not very interesting. It'sit's the dark, gallant fallen onethat is moving to me. He was ananan implement really. What I was writingabout was the trilogy of man's conscience, represented by the young Britishpilot officer, the runner, and the quartermaster general. The one that said,"This is dreadful, terrible, and I won't face it even at the cost of my life."That was the British aviator. The old general, who said, "This is terriblebutbut we can bear it." The third one, the battalion runner, who said, "This isdreadful, I won't stand it, I'll do something about it."The old general wasSatan, who had been cast out of heaven andbecause God himself feared him.Well, whatthe thing that had puzzled me was that going back, as far as Icould gather, he also had been the father of the corporal. Yes, that's right.And that is what had somewhat puzzled me in the allegorical  That was a part ofof Satan'sfearsomeness, that he could usurp the legend of God. That was what made himsoso fearsome and so powerful, that he couldcould usurp the legend of God andthen discard God. That's why God feared him. would you care tosay anything about the allegorical function of the horse in the Fable? He seems to have some very complex or interestingcharacteristics. Not to me, no. That was simplyanother struggle between man and his conscience and his environment. The horsewassimply a tool. That is, that foul and filthy Cockney hostler wasstill capable of love for something. That if he had maybeif he hadhad abetterbetter childhood, a betterbetter background, he might've been capable ofbetter love of something more worthy thanthan a horse. But he was capable of lovefor one thing, that he could sacrifice to and could defend, even though it wasonly a horse.Mr. Faulkner  In the story "Red Leaves," in the Indian burial ritual, would it havebrought disgrace to that had the man-servant committed suicide during thechase? Tell me that again. During the In thein the short story, "Red Leaves"  Yes, I know.During the burial, the burial ritual  Yes.Would it have brought disgrace to that whole ritual had the man-servantcommitted suicide during the chase, before they caught him? No, they could still havebrought his body back and immolated that. No, they were simply cleaning house.That was what the rule said, when the chief went back to the earth, his bodyservant and his dogs and his horse went with him. No, it would have been nodisgrace. Itin fact, if he had done that quicker, they would've been pleasedbecause it would have saved them all the trouble of tracking him back and forththrough that swamp, which they didn't want to do. They were a lazy, indolentpeople and there wasn't any use of anyone causing all that trouble when hecouldn't get away. What is your purpose in writing into the first section of The Sound and the Fury passages that seem disjointed within themselves, the ideas not connected with one another? That was part of the failure. Itseemed to me that the book approached nearer the dream if the groundworkof it was laid by the idiot, who was incapable of relevancy. That'sI agree withyou, too, that's a bad method, but to me, it seemed the best way to do it, thatI shifted those sections back and forth to see where they went best, but myfinal decision was that, though that was not right, that was the best to do it,that it was simply the groundwork of that story, as that idiot child saw it.He himself didn't know what he was seeing, that the only thing that heldhim into any sort of reality, into the world at all was the trust that hehad forfor his sister, that he knew that she loved him and would defend him,and so she was the whole world to him, and these things were flashesthat were reflected on her as in a mirror. He didn't know what they meant. You spoke a minute ago of the writer seeking to leave some creative markonon posterity. I was wondering if you think that the effect on the artist isbetter today when he can somehow achieve his immoralityimmortality during hislifetime, because the communication being so much wider and greater thanformerly, when perhaps the writer's fame came to him long after his death, andmaybe he was the only one during his lifetime that was satisfied with hiswork? I don't think so. I believe the writer takes a longer view than that. Heain't too interested inin what the contemporary world thinks about it. He has alonger view, thathehe is aimed not atat Jones of 1957 but at Jones of 2057 or4057.Well, do you think that theyou would have been just as satisfied if yourwork maybe had never been discovered until 4057? I think so, sure. Yes. Ofcourse, thewhen they began to bring in a little money, that was nice.I liked the money, but the glory, the rest ofit's not very valuable. Well, then, thinking that this period doesn't matter too much, do you goback over the things [and you still have] a lot of time left to work over the onesthat you've already written. Do you go back and worry about them and wish youhad done them differently? I wish I had done them better,but I don't have time to worry about it too much. That's just a constantthoughtoror belief that I would like to be able to do them over again. That is, notto go back and take one single book and write another version of it, but if Icould go back to, say, 1920 when I started, that I could do a better job. Ofcourse, I wouldn't, but that's an idle thought that occurs only when Ihaven't gotten anything better to do. Thethe best thing is to write anotherbook to do it. Because it takes only one book to do it. It's not the sum of alot of scribbling. It's it's one perfect book, you see. It'sit's oneonesingle urn or shape that you want to do.  you said that when you wrote the Fable that youyou had an idea, and you made the characters develop theplot through that, and that you did that because you thought you knew your tradewell enough by that time to do that. Now, does that mean that when you firststart out, that you think that it's better to make the characters shape the plotand sort of let it unfold as? I do, yes. Unless you have anextremely interesting and moving idea, which to me I thought I had in the Fablewas the thought, Just suppose that had beenChrist under the cenotaph with the eternal fire burning, andand all thetemporarily well-known world figures to come and put a wreath of moribundflowers on it. Suppose that had been Christ crucified again. That would betwice, and would we have another chance? But it's best, I think, for the writerto write about people. That'sthat's your trade, you know. Your craft is towrite about people. They're infinitely interesting. They're infinitely capableof diversion, of change, of aberrations. Yet they're intrinsically the samething. It's the same heart, the same anguish, the same desire to be better thanyou are, the same passion that the heart feels, the same ambition,aspiration, hope. That's what you're writing about. Yes'm.When you do write about people that waywell, of course, you don't haveto put up with the critics, but I noticed particularly that when a new bookcomes out, all these Freudian implications are pulled out and all sorts ofundercurrents, rather than just the simple here's what happened, andand of course,there's always more to it than that, but all kinds of weird things are justpulled out of the hat and thrown around. Does that bother you? Does it disturbyou that everything is sort of misconstrued? I can't say because I'm notaware of it. I don'tdon't read the critics. I don't know any literarypeople. The people I know areare other farmers andand horse people andhunters, and we talk about horses and dogs andand guns andandand what to do aboutthis hay crop or this cotton crop, not about literature. I think, I'm convinced though, that sort of criticism, whether it'sit's nonsensical or not isvalid because it is a symptom ofofof change or motion, which is life. And also,it's a proof that literature, art, is ais a living quantity in our socialcondition. If it were not, then therethere'd be no reason for people totodelve and find all sorts of symbolisms and psychological strains and currents init. And I'm quite sure that there are some writers to whom that criticism isgood, that it could help them find themselves. I don't know that the criticcouldcould teach the writer anything because I'm inclined to think thatnobody really can teach anybody anything, that you offer it, and it's there, andifand if it is your will or urge to learn it, you do, and the writer that doesneed the criticism can get quite a lot of benefit from it.  in "That Evening Sun," is the ditch symbolical of the colorline? Could be, but, you see, I Then he will need observation. He uses that, but I don't believethat hehe himself knows or has time to know just how much ofwhich was where and when.  when you were out in Hollywood, did you have anything to do withtelevising some of your stories? I heard that you . Now, they have been televised,haven't they? Yes, every now and then I hear about one. I don't have a radio andtelevision, so I don't keep up with what goes on, but I hear now and then that they havebeen on TV. Sir, what are the spotted horses symbolic of, if anything? As spotted horses, I don't know. Ithat may besymbolical, but as horses, that wastheythey symbolized the hope, theaspiration ofof the masculine part of society, that is capable ofofdoing, ofof committing puerile folly for some gewgaw that has drawn him, asjuxtaposed to the cold practicality ofof the women, whose spokesman Mrs.Littlejohn was when she said "Them men!" or "What fools men are!" That the man even in asociety where there's a constant pressure to conform can still be taken off by the chanceto buy a horse for three dollars. Which to me is a good sign, I think. I hope that man canalways be [tolled] off that way, to buy a horse for three dollars.  what sort of reading do you best enjoy? Do you have much time forthe work of contemporary novelists? No, I don't. I haven't read a contemporary book in twenty-odd years, unlesssomeone says, "This is a good book. I think you would like it," and so I will get that bookand read it, but I've got out of the habit of keeping up withwithcontemporaries because I never was a literary man in the sense ofofof needing to keep abreast of the establishment of literature. To me, reading is likewritingI do it for fun. I'm not too interested inin what anybodyelse has done, that I read books because it's fun.How about the classics? The classics? I read the books that I liked when I first began to read, and theyareyes, what ranks as classics now, meaning by that any book that people stillread after a hundred or two years. Sir, could you suggest any books that one read first, in order to get a clearerand more comprehensive picture of your complete works, and if there are any, why thesespecific choices? There are none. I think the best way to readno, I can't say the bestway, this is the way I read. I take the book, and I can tell within two or three pages ifI want to read that book now. If I don't, I put that down, I take another. I would sayto take Faulkner that same way, and read a page or two until you find onethat you want to read another page. It would be difficult for anyone, except an expert,to plot out a schedule for you. I would do it that way, I think. Sir, do you have any solution for a man to find peace if he cannot write, as you? Well, I don't think the writer finds peace. If he did, he wouldhewould quit writing. Maybe man is incapable of peace. Maybe that is whatdifferentiates man from a vegetable. Though, maybe the vegetables don't even find peace.Maybe there's no such thing as peace, that it is a negative quality, that And I understand. I am speaking of peace in his own heart. Yes, well, I'mI'm inclined to think that the only peace man knowsis he says, "Why good gracious, yesterday I was happy." That at the moment,he'she's too busy. That maybe peace is only a condition inretrospect, when the subconscious hashas gotten ridofof thethe gnats and the tacks and the broken glass in experience and has leftonly the peaceful, pleasant things. That was peace. Maybe peace is not "is,"but "was." Do you enjoy reading Shakespeare? I heard you speak of Homer. I was justwondering how you felt  Yes'm. I still read Shakespeare. I have a one-volume Shakespeare that I havejust about worn out carrying around with me.  I think you told somebody once that if you had ayou werewriting something, and you had something to get up to every morning and go to work on,you'd never have to be afraid of anything in the world any more. And I wonder what youmeant by that. I mean by that, that out of idleness, that if you have something toget up to tomorrow morning, you're too busy to pay much attention to fear. Of course,youyou have the fears, but you haveyou don't have timeto take them too seriously, if you have something to get up to do tomorrow.It don't matter too much what it is. And if it's something that you yourself believe isvalid, in the sense that the artist believes what he's doing is valid, in that it may dosomething to uplift man's heart, not to make man any more successful, but to temporarilymake him feel better than he felt before, to uplift his heart for a moment. Yes, siroh, yes, ma'am.In "The Bear,"is the possession and destruction of the wildernessa symbolic indication of any sort of corruption in the South? And if this is true, whatsort of prognostication does this have for the future of the South or of the country asa whole? Well, of course, the destruction of the wilderness is not a phenomenon of theSouth, you know. That is a change that's going on everywhere, andI think that man progresses mechanically and technically much faster than hedoes spiritually, that there may be something he could substitute for the ruinedwilderness, but he hasn't found that. He spends more time ruining the wilderness than hedoes finding something to replace it, just like he spends more time producing more peoplethan something good to do with the people, or to make better people out of them. Thatthat's to me is a sad and tragic thing for thefor the old days, the old times,to go, providing you have the sort of background which a country boy like me had when thatwas a part of my life. That I don't want it to change, but then that's trueof everyone as he grows old. He thinks that the old times were the besttimes, and he don't want it to change. Is your short story "Death Drag" based on an actual event or experience in yourlife? Not too much. They wereI did a little, what they call barnstorming inthe early days after the War, when aeroplanes were not too usual, and people would pay ahundred dollars to be taken for a short ride in one, but I don't remember anything thatwas specifically like this. This was, again, a human being in conflict with hisenvironment and his time. This man who hated flying, but that was what he had to do,simply because he wanted to make a little money. What symbolic meaning did you give to the dates of The Soundand the Fury? Now there's a matter of hunting around in the carpenter's shop to find a toolthat will make a better chicken-house. And probablyI'm sure it was quiteinstinctive that I picked out Easter, but that I wasn't writing any symbolism of thePassion Week at all. I justthat was a tool that was good for the particularcorner I was going to turn in my chicken-house, and so I used it. Sir, you mentioned some of the Russian authors before. What do you think ofDostoevsky?Do you consider him one of the best? He's one that has not only influenced me a lot, but that I have got a great dealof pleasure out of reading, and I still read him again every year or so. That asa craftsman, as well asas his insight into people, his capacityfor compassion. He was one of the ones that any writer wants to match if hecan. That'she was a one that wrote a good "Kilroy Was Here." There's a line in "Was" that I wonder if you would explain something about it, that Tomey's Turl says to Cass. "Anytime you wants to get something done, from hoeing outa crop to getting married, just get the women-folks to working at it. That all you needsto dothen all you needs to do is set down and wait." Well, that's good advice,but does he use it in this story? Does Tomey's Turl get the women folks to work forhim? Well, I'm sure he would if he'd had time, but people werewere runninghim with dogs so much and harrying and harassing from pillar to post, he didn't have time,but if he could havecould've got the men to stop long enough, then MissSophonsiba would have settled that whole thing. She would have taken Uncle Buck home, andthen Tomey's Turl and Tennie could have gotten married, and things would have beensettled. It was the men that kept things stirred up. Probably Tomey's Turl knew that soonas the dust settled, no matter what was the outcome of that poker game, Miss Sophonsibaand Uncle Buck would get married, and that then he and Tennie would be let alone.  is Requiem for a Nun going to be put onas a play? It has been knocking around Europe for about five years. I wrotethat not as a play but as another of the carpenter's tools which seemed to me the best wayto tell a story. There was a young woman. She was aa friend, a sweetheartofof my youngest brother's, that I knew of vaguely around home in Oxford, andshe's trying to be an actress and so she asked me to let her do it as a play, so I gaveher the rights to it, and that's why it has never been in the States because she hasn'tgot enough reputation for anyone to put up the money that a play in this country costs. Itwill, I assume, reach here in time sooner or later.But you haven't got any idea of your own about how it should be put on or whetherthere should be a chorus used? No'm, I'm not a playwright, and I never saw but three or four playsin my life. I wonder if you could comment on who you think in, say, two hundred years fromnow will leave the biggest "Kilroys Were Here."Of this century, which writers will leave thebiggest "Kilroy," if any? I don't want to answer that question because I'm too unfamiliarwithwith contemporary writers. I haven't read any contemporaries sincethe three or four of my time, and so often a remark like that in simpletalk, it gets out, and someone's feelings have been hurt that the man that spoke it had nointention of hurting because he didn't even know he existed, and so for that reasonII wouldn't answer that question at all.I would say that I think that Sherwood Anderson has notreceived the recognition that he deserves and some day will have.What about Hemingway? Hemingway, now he'she's alive, and that's where I'dbetter stay out of trouble by saying nothing, you see.Would you say anything about your own writingsor would you hurt yourown feelings? No, I still haven't done it, but I intend to live to be about a hundred yearsold, so I've got forty more years yet. By that time I'll answer your question, if you'restill around. Thank you very much, Mr. Faulkner. Sir, I come from India, and I've been trying to read a good many of yourbooks. The problem [I am finding] it extremely difficult to followthe narrative method that you adopt. Is it true to say that you adopt a lyricalmethod to a narrative, and [a novel is also a] narrative of certain events and what thecharacters do, what happens to them? We find that in a novel like As I Lay Dying or The Sound and theFury or the Sanctuary that it's difficult tofollow the event. Is it true to say that you follow the lyrical method whiletrying to tell a story? Am I correct? No, I think the writer is concerned first in telling about people,people in conflict with themselves and with others, with their environment, andhe uses whatever method seems to him the best to tell what he is trying to tellin the most dramatic and passionate way, that he is not trying to use a lyricalmethod deliberately. It may seem to him best to use a lyrical method or maybethe result ofof his own agony and anguish to say what he wants to saybecomes lyrical. Who is the central character of Absalom, Absalom!?It seems so obviously to be Sutpen, yet it's been said that it's also the storyof Quentin, and I was wondering just who is the central character? The central character is Sutpen, yes. The story of a man who wanted ason and got too many, got so many that they destroyed him. It's incidentally thestory ofof Quentin Compson's hatred of the badqualities in the country he loves. But the central character is Sutpen, thestory of a man who wanted sons. Sir, in the same book, I was wondering what is supposed to be thereader's attitude towards Mr. Coldfield, the father of Ellen? Well, my attitude is that he was a pretty poor man. I don'tknow what the reader's attitude might be, but I still felt compassion and pityfor him, but he was a poor man in my opinion. Sir, what sort of a deal was made between Goodhue Coldfield and Sutpen inreference to the bill of lading? It looked like they pulled some sort ofdeal. I don't remember. That book is so long ago to me, butbutColdfield was a petty, grasping man and Sutpen was abold, ruthless man, and Sutpen used Coldfield's pettiness for his, Sutpen's,ends, but I don't remember exactly what it was.Mr. Faulkner Sir, in Light in August, the central character JoeChristmas had most of his troubles and his persecutions and in his search tofind himself was based on his belief that he was part Negro, and yet it's nevermade really clear that he is. Was he supposed to be part Negro, or was thissupposed to add to the tragic irony of the story? I think that was his tragedy. He didn't know what he was, and so he wasnothing. Hehe deliberately evicted himself from the human racebecause he didn't know which he was. That was his tragedy. That to me was the tragic, central idea of the story, that he didn't know what he was, andthere was no way possible in life for him to find out, which to me is the mosttragic condition a man could find himself in, not to know what he isand to know that he will never know.Sir, if he is notdoes not definitely have Negro blood, well,what is the significance of Gavin Stevens's surmise there at the end when heexplains that there's a conflict of blood? That that is only a guess that standsfor a guess and not a final knowledge of  Yes, yes, that is an assumption, a rationalization which Stevensmade. That is, the people that destroyed him made rationalizations about what hewas. They decided what he was. But Christmas himself didn't know, and he evictedhimself from mankind. I don't remember. I don't remember that. Let me think a minute.I don't remember whether Clytie was any relation to Charles Bon'smother. That's so long ago, too.They have the same father. Well, then, yes, that would be the reason, of course. do you think that a comparison can justly be made betweenJoe Christmas and Charles Bon's son? Is there much in their behavior you thinkthat's similar? There again you have me. I don't remember. They're both so long ago, andthat's one good thing about being a writer. You can get rid of one book youdon't have to read again. Mr. Faulkner  In working out the situation of Joe Christmas, did you deliberately havein mind a correspondence between his situation and Oedipus, for example, as hasrecently been brought out in an essay published in the Quarterly magazine? No, not deliberately and not consciously. That's another matter of thewriter reaching back into the lumber room of his memory for whatever he needsto create the character or the situation. Theandthe similarity is there, but it was not by deliberate intent. Itwas byby coincidence, not accident, but by coincidence. Along those same lines, I noticed a similarity between Sutpen andHeathcliff from Emily Bronte's Wuthering Heights, and Iwas wondering if there's any intentional similarities here at all? I don't know. I don't know Wuthering Heights. Inever read it.Thank you. in Wild Palms, there is a passagestrongly reminiscent of the Grand Inquisitor in Dostoevsky's Brothers Karamazov, the import of which seems to condemn not Christbut organized religion. In Light in August, much of theaction seems to stem from almost fanatical Calvinism. Would it be true tosurmise that you favor strongly individual rather than an organizedreligion? I do, always.Then you think perhaps that man must work out his own salvation fromwithin rather than without? I do, yes. Sir, I have often wondered through what process the author actually goeswhen he writes a book. Could you briefly outline what process you go through? Now, I know I can't. I'mI'm lazy. I hate tothemechanics of putting the words down on paper, and I do as much of it as possiblein my head. I willthat is, putting it down on paper is the lastresort. I've got to get it out of my system, and so I don't know what system Imight use mentally to get the facts in order, tobring the mass of material into thethe form accordingto the rules ofof unity and emphasis. I just don't know.Some people work from notes. Theythey make notes and then correlatethe notes and then edit and then write and then do a draft. I don'tdo that. I try my best not to have to change anything because I'm lazy, I think,that I don't like to work.How many times do you rewrite the [hundreds of] drafts? Sometimes the first one is all right. Sometimes I will do three or fouror five until it comes right, but I will try my best not to do it but oncebecause I hate to work.  In another class, you stated that you seldom have the plot of your novelsworked about before you begin to write, but that they simply develop fromafrom a character or an incident. I was wondering if you rememberwhat character or what incident caused you to write Absalom,Absalom!? Sutpen.You thought about the character  Yes, the idea of a man whowho wanted sons andgot sons who destroyed him. Thethe other characters I had to get outof the attic to tell the story of Sutpen.  do you ever consciously base yourany of yourcharacters, either major characters or minor characters, on people you find inevery-day life. For example, during your time spent in Charlottesville, couldyou possibly incorporate someone who lived here into one of your major books, asa conscious exercise? I will very likely do it, but not as a conscious exercise. The writer iscompletely amoral. Hehe will use experience. He will rob from otherwriters. He will take from life, but he is trying to create acharacter of his own, and so very likely in time, I willwill needsomeone I have seen in Charlottesville, Virginia, and will without anycompunction use him.  I've been looking for Sutpen'sthe reason for Sutpen'sdownfall,and it seems to me that the Civil War plays a part init. Is thatis that true? Yes.But that's notthat's not the main reason? No, thisI used the Civil War tofor my own endsthere. SutpenSutpen's country was wrecked by the CivilWar, but that didn't stop Sutpen. He was still trying to get the son, stilltrying to establish a dynasty. He was still trying to get even with that man whoin his youth had said, "Go to the back door." Sir, in Light in August, much of the action comesback to the scene or the picture of a column of yellow smoke coming up fromJoanna Burden's cabin. I was wonderingyou had said that in Sound and the Fury you got the idea for the storyfrom seeing a little girl like Caddy in a tree. I was wondering if that happenedwith Light in August. Perhaps that was the scene that youhad seen and that you started from in that story. No, that story began with Lena Grove, the idea ofofof the younggirl with nothing, pregnant, determined to find her sweetheart. Itwasthat was out of mymy admiration for women, for thecourage and endurance of women. As I told that story, I had to get more and moreinto it, but that was mainly the story of Lena Grove. In Absalom, Absalom!, what was the significance ofSutpen pitting himself against his Negro servants, the wild Negro servants, andespecially in that scene where Ellen happened in when he had brought the children there to watch it? Was that another example of thedecadence of the South? No, notnot by intent. That was another instanceof Sutpen's ruthlessness, of his will, his implacable will to create a dynastyand fill it with sons, and I thought ofof rather these,which seemed to me dramatic oror amusing or tragic incidents, inventedthemselves as props for Sutpen's will, implacable will, to get the son. In Sanctuary,is the character ofPopeye emblematic of evil in a materialistic society, or what would he standfor? No, he was to me another lost human being. He became asymbol of evil in modernmodern society only by coincidence, but I wasstill writing about people, not about ideas, not about symbols.Sir, I've been told that the title of Light in Augustcame from a colloquialism for the completion of a pregnancy. Is that true? No, I used it because in my country in August there's aapeculiar quality to light, and that's what that title means. It has ina sense nothing to with the book at all, the story at all. How do you pronounce the name of your mythical county? If you break it down into syllables, it's simple. Y-o-k, n-a, p-a,t-a-w, p-h-a, YOK-na-pa-TAW-pha. It's a Chickasaw Indian word, meaning waterruns slow through flat land.   what was the particular significance of havingofhaving Wash Jones, a very humble man, be the instrument through which Sutpen methis death? Is that to relate back to the social stratum from which Sutpenhimself came and have there a sort of ironic effect? Just what was the idea ofthat? In a sense. In another sense, Wash Jones represented the manwho survived the Civil War. Thethe aristocrat in the columned housewas ruined, but Wash Jones survived it unchanged. He had been Wash Jones before1861, and after 1865 he was still Wash Jones, and Sutpen finally collided withhim. Sir, in some of your stories, you've used scenes wherein two or morepeople are sitting around or across from each other at a table or a desk, in avery dark room where perhaps only the hands can be seen in the lighting. I waswondering if that sort of scene meant anything to you, or that you felt that youcould use that particular scene for a certain type of information in your story,or just what? I think maybe instinctively I like understatement. Maybe Ihave a feeling forfor somberness. Probably I do, but I dolike to tell things as simply byby understatement, totellto show just the surface withwith the darkimplications behind it of an instance [or] scene.Mr. Faulkner  Do you believe that the South of today is the South of people like WashJones and the Snopes clan or do you think[do you still thinkthere's noble blood there]? I think that it's mostly the South of Wash Jones andSnopeses, but there'sthere's athe something left bythethe older, braver people that appears now and then, but it's acountry mainly of Snopeses and Wash Joneses. They survived. Thethequality that was left by the old, brave aristocratic people showsoccasionally. Nobody knows where it mightwhen it might appear orwhere from. In Light in August, do you feel that ReverendHightower dies feeling that he has achieved a certain kind of salvation,[received] some sort of salvation, [Mr. Faulkner]? He didn't die. He hadhad wrecked his life. He had failed hiswife. He had failed himself, but there was one thing that he still had, whichwas thethe brave grandfather thatgalloped into the town to burn the Yankee stores, and at least he had that.Everything else was gone, but since he had been aa man of God, hestill tried to be a man of God, and he could not destroy himself. But hehadhad destroyed himself, but he still couldn't take his own life. Hehad to endure it, to live, but that was one thing thatwas pure and fine that he had, was the memory of hisgrandfather, who had been brave. So much of the story in Absalom, Absalom! isreconstructed by Shreve and Quentin. How does the reader know which to accept asobjective truth and which to consider just a [reflection] oftheir personalities? Well, the story was told by Quentin to Shreve. Shrevewas the commentthe commentator that heldthe thing to something of reality. If Quentin had been let alone totell it, it would have become completely unreal. It had to haveaa solvent to keep it real, keep it believable, creditable.Otherwise, it would have vanished into smoke and fury. I can't say just where it was that I had to put it down, that I decidedI didn't know enough at that time maybe oror my feeling toward itwasn't passionate enough or pure enough, but I don't remember at what point Iput it down. Though when I took it up again I almost rewrote the whole thing. Ithink that what I put down were inchoate fragments that wouldn't coalesce, andthen when I took it up again, Ias I remember, I rewrote it. That's possible, but I don't remember just how much of thefirst I rewrote when I began the second time.Mr. Faulkner  I would like to ask you to identify a quality for me. I am thinking of asentence toward the end of "The Bear." I am going to read part of the sentenceso that you will understand what I am asking about. "There was a boy who wishedto learn humility and pride in order to become skillful and worthy in the woods.He suddenly found himself becoming so skillful so rapidly that he feared that hewould never become worthy because he had not learned humility." Then finally, itgoes on, "until an old man who could not have defined either had ledhim as though by the hand to that point where an old bear and a little mongrelof a dog showed him that by possessing one thing other he would possess themboth." What is that "one thing other"? Courage.Thank you very much. That was the little dog that Yes. I wondered if it was pity or truth, Mr. Faulkner. Courage, it was. The little dog that never saw a bearbigger than he was. Is the title of Absalom, Absalom! taken from thepassage in the Bible found in Second Samuel? Yes.Did you write the novel with this episode in your mind or did you firstwrite the novel and then realizing the similarity of the name  They were simultaneous. As soon as I thought of the idea oftheof the man who wanted sons and the sons destroyed him, then Ithought of the title. Did you expect to write a [any more] poetry? And if so, arethere any particular subjects you'd [like to see in your poetry]? I'm a failed poet. I consider myself a failed poet. I've tried to be apoet, and I couldn't be a good one, and so I did the next best thing which Icould do, but I'm still a failed poet, but what I writeis, in my opinion, poetry.  what do you consider your best book? The one that failed the most tragically and the mostsplendidly. That was The Sound and the Furytheone I worked at the longest, the hardest, that was to me themost passionate and moving idea, and made the most splendid failure. That's theone that's myI consider the best, notwell, best is thewrong wordthat's the one that I love the most.I wanted to ask something about [that]. Was it very difficult to write thestream-of-consciousness [part of] Benjamin? No, no. Notnot once I understood Benjy and understood thestory.It was very simple, very easy.That's such a difficult part to understand unless someone shows you No, it was very easy to do. That's probably why it's so hard to read. Ithink anything that is easy to do is per se probablybad , but I couldn't think of any better way totell about Benjy. I was trying to tell a story. I tried that way. That wasn'tenough. I tried with Quentin. That wasn't enough. I tried with Jason. That stillwasn't enough.And then I tried Faulkner and that still wasn't enough.It still failed, and that's why I love it.Mr. Faulkner  Sir.Most people are very struck by your change of style in Light in August. For example, you use the present tense to tell thestory [in], rather than the past. Was thatdid you mean something by that orwere you just using a new form for dramatic import or? No, that just seemed to me the best way to tell the story. It wasn't adeliberate change of style. I don't know anything about style. Idon'tI think a writer withwith a lot topushinginside him to get out hasn't got time to bother with style. If he just likes towrite and hasn't got anything urging him, then he can become a stylist, but theones with a great deal pushing to get out don't have time to beanything but clumsy, like Balzac, for instance.Mr. Faulkner  In Absalom, Absalom!, when Shreve and Quentin arereconstructing the story for each other, they set up a lawyer who was directingthe campaign of Charles's mother to gain revenge against Sutpen. Was therereally a lawyer, do you think, or is it just a product of their imagination asthey reconstructed the story? I'm sorry, I don't remember that.They speak about the man who was counseling Charles's mother in trying toget back at Sutpen. There probably was a lawyer. I don't remember that book, but yes, yes,there was a lawyer. That sounds too logical in Mississippi terms. Yes, hewasthere would have been lawyer there. Sir, what is your personal reaction to situations such as being in aclassroom when you discover that a lot of people who've read into your novels thingsthat you didn't intend them to read? Interest.I didn't know about allthese things and so I'm quite interested to hear that they were in there. Theymust've been in there for people to find them.Do you feel that perhaps you've failed inin just plain telling your storyor that perhaps you've done more than you realized ? No, to me, it wasn't told as well as it should've been told, and that'swhy I write another one. The one that I have finished,that'sthat's water under the bridge and I'm not interested any longerbecause that wasn't good enough. 
